@BEGIN_HEADER
Title: The Life and Doctrine of Saint Catherine of Genoa
Author: Unknown
@END_HEADER

   The publication of the Life of St Catherine of Genoa at this moment
   is, for several reasons, opportune.

   The reading of it will correct the misconceptions of many who honestly
   fancy that the Catholic Church encourages a mechanical piety, fixes
   the attention of the soul almost, if not altogether, on outward
   observances, and inculcates nothing beyond a complete submission to
   her authority and discipline.

   The life of our Saint is an example of the reverse of that picture. It
   makes clear the truth that the immediate guide of the Christian soul
   is the Holy Spirit, and that her uncommon fidelity to the inspirations
   of the Holy Spirit, made this holy woman worthy of being numbered by
   the Church among that class of her most cherished children, who have
   attained the highest degree of Divine love which it is possible for
   human beings to reach upon earth.

   The mistake of the persons above spoken of arises from their failing
   to see that the indwelling Holy Spirit is the divine life of the
   Church, and that her sacraments have for their end to convey the Holy
   Spirit to the soul. It arises also from their not sufficiently
   appreciating the necessity of the authority and discipline of the
   Church, as safeguards to the soul from being led astray from the paths
   of the Holy Spirit.

   Without doubt God could have, if He had so pleased, saved and
   sanctified the souls of men in spite of their ignorance, perversity,
   and weakness, by the immediate communication and action of the Holy
   Spirit in their souls, independently of an external organization like
   the Church. But such was not His pleasure, or His plan. For His own
   wise reasons, He chose to establish a Church which He authorized to
   teach the world whatsoever He had commanded, which He promised to be
   with unto the end of all time, whose ministry, sacraments, and
   government should serve Him, as His body had, to continue and
   complete, by a visible means, the work of man's redemption.

   Hence it is an entirely false view of the nature and design of the
   Church to suppose that it was intended to be, or is in its action, or
   ever was, or ever can be, a substitute for the authority of Christ, or
   the immediate guidance of the Holy Spirit in the Christian soul.

   The authority of the Church is no other that the authority of Christ,
   as He Himself has declared, "He that heareth you, heareth Me." [1] The
   sacraments are nothing else than the channels, or visible means, of
   communicating the Holy Spirit to the soul. It is the divine action in
   the Church which gives to its external organization the principal
   reason for its existence.

   And it is equally false, and at the same time absurd, to suppose for a
   moment that the Holy Spirit indwelling in the Church and embodied in
   her visible authority, and the same Holy Spirit dwelling in and
   inspiring the Christian souls, should ever contradict each other, or
   come into collision. Whenever, by supposition, this takes place, be
   assured it is not the work of the Holy Spirit, but the consequence of
   ignorance, error, or perversity on the part of the individual; for it
   must not be forgotten, or ever be lost sight of, that it pleased
   Christ our Lord to promise to His Church that "the gates of hell shall
   not prevail against her," [2] and not to teach individual Christians.

   The test, therefore, of the sincerity of the Christian soul in
   following the inspirations of the Holy Spirit, will be shown, in case
   of uncertainty, by its prompt obedience to the voice of the Holy
   Church. It is only when the soul goes astray from the paths of the
   Holy Spirit, it finds trammels to its feet, otherwise it is conscious
   of perfect liberty in the Church of God.

   From the foregoing truths, the following practical rule of
   safe-conduct can be drawn. The immediate guide of the soul to
   salvation and sanctification is the Holy Spirit, and the criterion or
   test that the soul is guided by the Holy Spirit, is its ready
   obedience to the authority of the Church. With this rule there can be
   no danger of going astray, and the soul can walk in absolute security,
   in the ways of sanctity.

   This is the way in which all the saints have trod to arrive at
   Christian perfection, but no life illustrates this truth more plainly,
   so far as we are aware, than the life of our saint.

   There are others who think that the Church fosters a sanctity which is
   not concerned with this present life, rendering one useless to
   society, and indifferent to the great needs of humanity.

   The love of God and the love of one's neighbor as taught by Christ and
   His Apostles, are essentially one. If the saints of the Church were
   distinguished for their great love for God, they ought therefore to be
   equally distinguished for their great love for mankind. The one is the
   test of the other. If any man say, "I love God, and hateth his
   neighbor, he is a liar." Such is the emphatic language of St John. [3]

   Let us apply this test, with the history of the Church and the
   biographies of her saints, in our hands. Take, for example, the
   religious orders, and it is a fair one, for nearly all of them were
   founded by saints, whose special aim it was to teach and practice
   Christian perfection, as understood by the Catholic Church. What do
   these pages of history and biography teach us? All that we possess of
   the classics, and of literature in every department, pagan as well as
   Christian, prior to the invention of the art of printing, we owe
   exclusively to the industry and labor of the early monks. Not a slight
   service. These men were for the most part the founders and professors
   of the great universities and colleges in England, Italy, Spain,
   France, Germany, and Ireland. The last were not the least, for the
   monks of Ireland were famous as founders of colleges and seats of
   learning in their own as well as in foreign countries. Monks were the
   pioneers in agriculture, and in many industrial and mechanical arts,
   while their monasteries became the centers of great cities, many of
   which still retain their names. They were the sowers of those seeds,
   which, being developed by time, men of our day claim all the honor of
   their results, but modestly, under the title of "modern civilization!"

   "Idle monks and nuns" were they? They were, as a class, men and women
   who ate less, worked harder, and did more for intellectual progress,
   civilization, and social well-being, than any other body of men and
   women, whose record can be found on the pages of history, or who can
   be pointed out in this nineteenth century!

   As for works of mercy, such is the superabundance of material, that it
   is difficult to know where to begin, and how to leave off.

   The brotherhoods and sisterhoods in the Church, devoted to the care
   and relief of the sick, the orphan, the aged, the poor, the captive,
   the prisoner, the insane, and to the thousand and one ills that human
   nature is heir to, as well as those which are self-inflicted, who can
   count them?

   True, there were some religious orders which were given almost
   exclusively to contemplation, but these were exceptional vocations,
   and were so considered by the Church. These had also a most important
   social bearing and practical value, which, however, this is not the
   place to demonstrate. But the great majority of her saints were men
   and women whose hearts were overflowing with warm and active sympathy
   for their race, consecrating their energies to its improvement
   spiritually, intellectually, morally, and bodily, and not seldom
   laying down their lives for its sake.

   That the Church did not compel all her children, seeking Christian
   perfection, into one uniform type, is true. Governed by that divine
   wisdom which made man differ from man in his talents and aptitudes,
   she did not attempt to mar and wrong their nature, but sought to
   elevate and sanctify each in his own peculiar individuality.

   Read the life of Saint Catherine, and in imagination fancy her in the
   city hospital of Genoa, charged, not only with the supervision and
   responsibility of its finances, but also overseeing the care of its
   sick inmates, taking an active, personal part in its duties, as one of
   its nurses, and the whole establishment conducted with strict economy,
   perfect order, and the tenderest care and love! Fancy this for a
   moment in the city hospital of Genoa in the sixteenth century, and
   seek for her compeer in the city of New York, or in any other city in
   the world, in our day, and if you find one, and outside of the
   Catholic Church, then, but not till then, you may repeat to your
   heart's content, that she fosters a sanctity which turns one's
   attention altogether away from this world, and makes one indifferent
   to the wants of humanity.

   Saint Catherine's life teaches another lesson to those whose mental
   eyes are not closed to facts as plain as the sun when shining at
   noonday.

   We hear much said, and not a little is written, in the United States
   and in England, about the exclusion of woman from spheres of action
   for which her natural aptitudes fit her equally, and in many cases
   render her superior to men; of her partial education, and in many
   cases, the inferior position which she is forced to accept in society.

   Strange that we hear no such complaints in Catholic society, or from
   Catholic women! Is it because they have been taught to hug the chains
   which make them slaves? or that they are denied the liberty of speech?
   or that their lips are closed by arbitrary authority? Not at all. The
   reason is plain. Women, no less than men, are free to occupy any
   position whose duties and functions they have the intelligence or
   aptitude to fulfill. They have the opportunities and are free to
   obtain the highest education their capacities are capable of. This,
   every Catholic woman knows and feels, and hence the absence of all
   consciousness, in the Church, of being deprived of her rights, of
   oppression, and injustice.

   One has but to open his eyes and read the pages of ecclesiastical
   history to be convinced that in the Catholic Church there has been no
   lack of freedom of action for women. Look for a moment at the
   countless number of sisterhoods in the Church, some counting their
   members by thousands, all under the government of one head, a woman,
   and elected by themselves for life. Others again, each house forming a
   separate organization, with a superior of its own, elected for a
   limited period. In fact, there is no form of organization and
   government, of which they do not give us an example, and carried on
   successfully, showing a practical ability in this field of action,
   which no one can call in question. Then, there is no kind of labor,
   literary, scientific, mechanical, as well as charitable, in which they
   may not engage, according to their abilities and strength. Who shall
   enumerate the different kinds of literary institutions, schools, and
   academies under their direction, and confessedly superior in their
   kind? Who shall count the hospitals, the orphanages, the
   reformatories, the insane asylums, and other similar institutions,
   where they have proved their capacity to be above that of men? All
   roads are open to woman's energies and capacities in the Church, and
   she knows and is conscious of this freedom; and what is more, she is
   equally aware that whatever she has ability to do, will receive from
   the Church encouragement, sanction, and that honor which is due to her
   labor, her devotion, and her genius.

   Few great undertakings in the Church have been conceived and carried
   on to success, without the cooperation, in some shape, of women. The
   great majority of her saints are of their sex, and they are honored
   and placed on her altars equally with men. It is not an unheard of
   event, that women, by their scientific and literary attainments, have
   won from Catholic Universities the title of Doctor. Saint Teresa is
   represented as an authorized teacher, with a pen in hand, and with a
   doctor's cap. It would carry us altogether too far beyond the limits
   of this preface to show how largely the writings of women in the
   Church, have contributed to the body and perfection of the science of
   theology.

   In this respect also, our saint was distinguished. Her spiritual
   dialogues and her treatise on purgatory have been recognized by those
   competent to judge in such matters, as masterpieces in spiritual
   literature. Saint Francis of Sales, that great master in spiritual
   life, in whose city we have the consolation of writing this preface,
   was accustomed to read the latter twice a year. Frederic Schlegel, who
   was the first to translate Saint Catherine's dialogues into German,
   regarded them as seldom if ever equaled in beauty of style; and such
   has been the effect of the example of Christian perfection in our
   saint, that even the "American Tract Society" could not resist its
   attraction, and published a short sketch of her life among its tracts,
   with the title of her name by marriage, Catherine Adorno.

   It was fitting that the life of Saint Catherine of Genoa should be
   translated for the first time into English, by one who is now no more,
   but who was while living, distinguished, like our saint, for her
   intellectual gifts, for her charity toward the poor and abandoned, and
   in consecrating her pen to the cause and glory of God's Church.

   Of the parents and ancestors of the blessed Catherine, and how at
   eight years of age she began to do penance; her gift of prayer, and of
   her desire to enter into religion, and her marriage against her will. 

   Catherine was born at Genoa in the year 1447. Her parents, Giacopo
   Fieschi and Francesca di Negro, daughter of Sigismund, Marquis di
   Negro, were both of illustrious and noble birth. On account of his
   merits, her father (a descendant of Robert, brother of Pope Innocent
   IV, who was uncle of another Pontiff, Adrain V) was created Viceroy of
   Naples, under King Regnier, in which office he remained until his
   death.

   Although of very noble parentage, and very delicate and beautiful in
   person, yet from her earliest years, she despised the pride of birth,
   and abhorred luxury; so that when only about eight years of age, she
   was inspired with the desire to do penance, and beginning to dislike
   the soft indulgence of her bed, she laid herself down humbly to sleep
   on straw, with a block of hard wood under her head, in the place of
   pillows of down.

   She had in her chamber that image of our Lord, which is commonly
   called "La Pieta," and whenever she entered there, and raised her eyes
   to it, a violent pain seized her whole frame, caused by her grief and
   love at the thought of what our Lord had suffered for love of us.

   She led a very simple life, seldom speaking with any one, very
   obedient to her parents, well skilled in the way of the divine
   precepts, and zealous in the practice of the virtues.

   At the age of twelve, God in his grace bestowed on her the gift of
   prayer, and a wonderful communion with out Lord, which enkindled
   within her a new flame of deep love, together with a lively sense of
   the sufferings he endure in his holy passion, with many other good
   inclinations for the things of God.

   At the age of thirteen, she was inspired with a desire for the
   religious life, and immediately communicated this inspiration to her
   spiritual father, who was also confessor to the devout convent of our
   Lady of Grace, in which she desired to become a nun, together with her
   pious sister Limbania. She earnestly begged the Father to make known
   her holy desire to the superiors of the convent above mentioned, and
   urge that they would deign to receive her into their company. When
   this prudent, spiritual father saw and heard such love for religion in
   one of so tender and delicate age, he began to represent to her the
   austerities of the religious life; the innumerable temptations of the
   enemy; the delicacy of her body, and many other things, to all of
   which Catherine answered with so much prudence and zeal, that the
   father was astonished, for her replies did not appear to him human,
   but supernatural and divine; and he therefore promised her that he
   would lay the matter before the superiors, which he did on the
   following day, at the same time communicating to them the prudent,
   remarkable answers of his spiritual daughter to his disclosures
   concerning the temptations and austerities of the religious life.
   After taking his proposal into deliberate consideration the superiors
   of the convent replied, that they were not accustomed to receive among
   them girls of so tender an age. To this the Father made answer that
   judgment and devotion not only supplied the want of age, but were
   better than years; still, they judged it inexpedient to receive her as
   it was contrary to their custom, which decision greatly afflicted the
   young girl who still trusted that Almighty God would not abandon her.

   At the age of sixteen, she was married by her parents to a young
   Genoese of noble family, named, Giuliano Adorno; and although this
   step was contrary to her wishes, yet her great simplicity, submission,
   and reverence for her parents gave her patience to endure it.

   But God, who in his goodness would not leave his chosen one to place
   her affections on the world and the flesh, permitted a husband to be
   given her entirely the opposite of herself in his mode of life, who
   caused her so much suffering, that for ten years, she could hardly
   support life, and by his imprudence she was at length reduced to
   poverty.

   The last five of these ten years she devoted to external affairs, and
   feminine amusements, seeking solace for her hard life, as women are
   prone to do, in the diversions and vanities of the world, yet not to a
   sinful extent; and she did this, because, during the five first years,
   she suffered inconsolably from sadness; this was constantly increased
   by the opposition of her husband's disposition to her own, which
   distressed her so much, that one day, (it was the vigil of St
   Benedict), having gone into the church of that saint, in her grief she
   exclaimed: "Pray to God for me, Oh, St Benedict, that for three months
   he may keep me sick in bed." This she said almost in desperation, not
   knowing what to do, so great was her distress of mind; for during the
   three months before her conversion she was overwhelmed with mental
   suffering, and filled with deep disgust for all things belonging to
   the world; wherefore, she shunned the society of every one. She was
   oppressed with a melancholy quite insupportable to herself, and took
   no interest in anything.

   But after these ten years she was called by God and converted in a
   marvelous manner, as will appear hereafter.


   She is wounded with divine love in the presence of her confessor.
   Manifestations of the love of God and of her own offences. The Lord
   appears to her carrying his cross, and she is taken up three degrees
   toward God. 

   The day following the feast of St Benedict, Catherine, at the instance
   of her sister, who was a nun, went to confession at the convent of the
   latter, although she had no desire to do so; but her sister said to
   her: "At least go to obtain the blessing of our confessor," for he was
   indeed a holy man. The moment she knelt before him, she was wounded so
   forcibly with the love of God, and received so clear a revelation of
   her misery and faults, and of the goodness of God, that she had well
   nigh fallen to the ground.

   Overpowered by these emotions, and by her sense of the offences she
   had committed against her dear Lord, she was so drawn away by her
   purified affections from the miseries of the world, that she became
   almost beside herself; and without ceasing, internally repented to
   herself, in the ardor of love: "No more would, no more sin." And at
   that moment if she had possessed a thousand worlds, she would have
   thrown them all away.

   Through the ardent flame of burning love with which she was enkindled,
   her good God, by his grace, impressed instantly upon that soul, and
   infused into it, all perfection, purging it of all earthly affections,
   illuminating it with a divine light by which she was enabled to
   perceive with her interior eye, his goodness; and in a word, united
   her with himself, and changed and transformed her entirely by the true
   union of a good will, inflaming her wholly with his burning love.

   The saint while in the presence of her confessor lost entirely all
   consciousness through this sweet wound of love, so that she could not
   speak; but her confessor was not yet aware of this when he chanced to
   be called out, and left her so overwhelmed with grief and love, that
   she said to him, with great difficulty, when he returned: "With your
   consent, father, I will leave my confession till another time;" and
   she did so. Returning home, she was so on fire and wounded with the
   love which God had interiorly manifested to her, together with the
   view of her miseries, that, as if beside herself, she went into a
   private chamber, and gave vent to her burning tears and sighs.

   At that moment she was instructed interiorly in prayer, but her lips
   could only utter: "oh Love! can it be that you have called me with so
   much love, and revealed to me at one view, what no tongue can
   describe?" For many days she could only utter herself in sighs, and
   wonderfully deep they were; and so great was her contrition for her
   offences against such infinite goodness, that if she had not been
   miraculously supported, her heart would have broken, and she would
   have died.

   But when our Lord saw this soul still more interiorly inflamed with
   his love, and filled with sorrow for her sins, he appeared to her in
   spirit, with the cross upon his shoulder, dripping with blood which
   she saw was shed wholly for love, and this vision so inflamed her
   heart, that she was more than ever lost in love and grief.

   This vision made such an impression upon her that she seemed always to
   see with her bodily eyes, her bleeding Love, nailed to the cross. Very
   plainly too did she see all the offences she had committed against
   him, and cried out continually: "Oh Love, no more sin, no more sin!"
   Her hatred of herself became so great, that filled with disgust she
   exclaimed: "Oh Love, if it be necessary I am prepared to make a public
   confession of my sins."

   After this she made her general confession with such contrition and
   compunction, that her soul was at once cleansed of its sins, for God
   had pardoned them all, consuming them in the flames of love, with
   which he had already wounded her heart; yet, to satisfy justice he led
   her through the way of satisfaction, permitting that this contrition
   and self-knowledge should continue for nearly fourteen months; and
   when she had made satisfaction, relieved her of the sight of her sins
   so entirely that she never beheld again the least of them, no more
   than if they had all been cast into the depths of the sea.

   At that moment of her vocation, when she was wounded at the feet of
   her confessor, she seemed to be drawn to the feet of our Lord Jesus
   Christ, and in spirit beheld all the graces, means, and ways, by which
   the Lord, in his pure love, had brought her to conversion. In this
   light she remained for more than a year, relieving her conscience by
   means of contrition, confession, and satisfaction.

   She felt herself drawn with St. John, to rest on the bosom of her
   loving Lord, and there she discovered a sweeter way which contained in
   itself many secrets of the bounteous love which was consuming her, so
   that she was often beside herself; and in her intense eagerness, her
   hatred of self, and her deep contrition, she would lick the earth with
   her tongue, and so great was the wain of contrition, and the sweetness
   of love, that she knew not what she was doing; but she felt her heart
   lightened, occupied with unbounded, poignant grief, and the sweet
   ardor of love. Thus she remained for three years or more, melted with
   love and grief, and with the deep and burning flames that were
   consuming her heart.

   Then she was drawn to the open wound in the side of the crucified
   Lord, and there she was allowed to see the Sacred heart of her Lord
   burning with the same flames with which her own was enkindled; at the
   sight of this, her heart died within her, and her strength abandoned
   her. This impression remained for many years which were spent by her,
   in continual sighs, and burning flames, so that her heart and soul
   were well nigh melted, and she was constrained to cry out: "I have no
   longer either soul or heart; but my soul and my heart are those of my
   Beloved;" and in him she was wholly absorbed and transformed.

   Finally, her sweet and loving Lord drew her to himself, and bestowed
   upon her a caress, by the power of which she was entirely immersed in
   that sweet Divinity to which she abandoned herself exteriorly, so that
   she exclaimed: "I live no longer, but Christ lives in me." She knew no
   longer whether her mere human acts were good or bad, but saw all
   things in God.

   How the desire was given her to receive holy communion, and of its
   precious effects in her; of her sufferings when she did not receive,
   and how it seemed to her that she had lost faith, and walked by sight.
   
   On the day of the Festival of the Annunciation of the glorious Virgin
   Mary, after her conversion, that is, after her loving wound, her Lord
   gave her the desire for holy communion, which she never lost during
   her whole life; and her Love ordered it in such a way, that communion
   was given her, without any care on her part, for she was, in a
   wonderful manner, provided with it in one way or another; and without
   asking, she was often summoned to receive it, by priests inspired by
   God to give it to her.

   On one occasion a holy religious said to her: "You receive communion
   every day, how are you now satisfied?" and she answered him simply,
   explaining her desires and feelings. In order to prove her, he said to
   her: "Perhaps there may be something wrong in receiving communion so
   often:" and then left her. In consequence of this, Catherine, for fear
   of doing wrong, abstained from communion, but with great pain; and the
   religious, finding that she thought more of doing wrong, than of the
   consolation and satisfaction of communion, directed her to make daily
   communion, and she returned to her accustomed way.

   Once, when at the point of death, so ill that she was unable to take
   any sustenance, she said to her confessor: "If you would give me my
   Lord three times only, I should be cured." It was done, and her health
   was immediately restored. Before receiving communion, she suffered
   severe pains about the heart, and said: "My heart is not like that of
   others, for it only rejoices in its Lord; and therefore give him to
   me." It indeed seemed that otherwise she could not have lived, and if
   deprived of communion, her life would have consumed away in suffering.
   Of this there are many proofs, for if, on any day, she happened not to
   receive, she would pass it in almost insupportable pain, so that her
   attendants were filled with compassion for her, and believed it
   clearly, to be the will of God, that she should receive daily.

   One day, after communion, God gave her such consolation, that she lost
   her consciousness, and the priest could not give her the ablution
   until she had been restored to herself, and she then exclaimed: "Oh,
   Lord, I do not desire to follow thee for these consolations, but only
   for pure love."

   Although she did not easily shed tears she awoke one night weeping,
   when she had dreamed that she was not to receive on the next day. But
   if, for any human reason, she could not have received it, she would
   have been patient and confident, saying to her Lord: "If thou wouldst,
   it could be given to me."

   She said, that at the beginning of her conversion, when this desire of
   communion was first given to her, she sometimes envied the priests who
   received whenever they wished, without causing remarks from any one.
   And it was her special desire, to be able to say the three masses on
   Christmas day; so that she envied no one in this world but the
   priests, and when she saw the Sacrament in the hands of one of them at
   the altar, she would say within herself: "Take it, take it quickly, to
   your heart, for it is the Lord of the heart." To receive it, she would
   have gone miles, and endured fatigues beyond human power to bear.

   When she was at mass she was often so occupied interiorly with her
   Lord, that she did not hear a word; but when the time came to receive
   communion she accused herself, and would say: "Oh! my Lord, it seems
   to me that if I were dead, I should come to life, in order to receive
   thee, and if an unconsecrated host were given to me, that I should
   know it by the taste, as one knows wine from water." She said this,
   because, when consecrated, it sent a certain ray of love into the very
   depths of her heart.

   She also said, that if she had seen the whole court of heaven, arrayed
   in such a manner, that there was no difference between God and the
   angels, yet the love in her heart would have caused her to know God,
   as the dog knows his master: and much sooner, and with less effort,
   because love, which is God, himself, instantly and directly finds its
   end, and last repose.

   At one time, on receiving, she perceived such an odor and such
   sweetness, that she believed herself in Paradise, when suddenly she
   turned towards her Lord, and humbly said: "O Lord perhaps thou wouldst
   draw me to thee by this fragrance? I do not desire it; I desire
   nothing but thee, and thee wholly; thou knowest, that from the
   beginning I have asked of thee the grace that I might never see
   visions, nor receive external consolations, for so clearly do I
   perceive thy goodness, that I do not seem to walk by faith but by a
   true and heartfelt experience."

   How she was unable to take food during Lent and Advent, being
   sustained by the Blessed Sacrament 

   Some time after her conversion, on the day the Annunciation of our
   Lady, her Love spoke within her, saying, that he wished her to keep
   the fast in his company in the desert, and immediately she became
   unable to eat, so that she was without food for the body until Easter,
   and with the exception of the three fast days, on which she had the
   grace to be able to eat, she took nothing during the whole of Lent.

   She afterwards ate, as at other times, without disgust; and in this
   manner she passed twenty-three Lents and as many Advents, during which
   time she took nothing but a tumblerful of water, vinegar, and pounded
   salt. When she drank this mixture, it seemed seemed as if it were
   thrown upon a red-hot surface, and that it was at once dried up in the
   great fire that was burning within her. How wonderful! for no one,
   however healthy, could bear a drink of this kind, fasting; but she
   described the sweetness that proceeded from her burning heart, as so
   great, that even this harsh beverage refreshed her.

   This rejection of food, at first, gave her great trouble, for now
   knowing the cause, she suspected some deception; but when she, again
   and again, forced herself to take food, and her stomach rejected it,
   all her family, as well as herself, regarded it as a prodigy; for even
   when she attempted to eat, in obedience to her confessor, the result
   was the same.

   This was the more remarkable, because at other times she could eat and
   retain her food, even up to the very day when Lent and Advent began.
   During the seasons when she could not eat, she practiced pious works
   more than at other times, she slept better, and felt stronger and more
   active; and she also went to table with the others, to avoid, as far
   as possible, all singularity; and even forced herself to taste
   something, in order to escape observation; then she would say to
   herself: "Oh if you knew what I feel within!" By this she meant the
   burning and pure love, and union with God, which those around her
   could hardly endure, so much were they astonished that she could not
   eat; but she paid no heed to them, saying to herself: "If we regarded
   the operations of God, we should look at the interior more than the
   exterior. Living without food is purely an operation of God, without
   my will; but it is nothing to boast of, or to cause surprise, for to
   him it is as nothing. The pure light shows us, that we should not
   regard the manifestations that God makes of himself for our
   necessities and his own glory, but only the pure love with which his
   divine majesty performs his work in our behalf, and the soul becoming
   these pure operations of a love which looks for no good that we can
   do, must needs love him purely, without regard to any particular grace
   which she receives from him, but looking to him alone, for himself
   alone, who is worthy of being loved without measure, and with no
   reference either to soul or body."

   During the first four years after she had received the sweet wound
   from her Lord, she performed many penances, and mortified all her
   senses. She deprived her nature of all that it desired, and obliged it
   to take what it disliked. She wore hair-cloth, and ate no meat, nor
   fruit of any kind, either fresh or dry; and being by nature courteous
   and affable, she did great violence to herself, by conversing as
   little as possible with her relatives when they visited her, without
   any respect to herself or to them; and if any one was surprised by it,
   she took no notice.

   She practiced great austerity in sleeping, lying down on sharply
   pointed things. As soon as she determined to do any thing, she never
   felt any temptation to the contrary. The fire within was so great,
   that she took no account of exterior things relating to the body,
   although she neglected no necessary work; and no temptations except
   those of her natural inclinations could affect her. This was the case
   throughout her whole after-life. She so resisted her natural
   inclinations, that they were completely destroyed. Temptations like
   insects, could not approach the flames of pure love enkindled in her
   heart.

   Her eyes were always cast down. During the first four years of her
   conversion she spent six hours daily in prayer, for such was the
   obedience of her body to the spirit, that it dared not rebel, although
   it suffered keenly; and she thus fulfilled in herself the words: cor
   meum, et caro meo, exultaverunt in Deum vivum.

   During these first four years, the interior fire that was consuming
   her produced such extreme hunger, and so quickly did she digest her
   food, that she could have devoured iron. She comprehended that this
   desire for food was something supernatural. She was also unable to
   speak except in so low a tone as scarcely to be understood, so
   powerful was her interior feeling.

   Most of the time she appeared like one beside herself, for she neither
   spoke, nor heard, nor tasted nor valued any thing in the world;
   neither did she look at any thing.

   Yet she lived in subjection to every one, and was always more inclined
   to do the will of others than her own. And it is remarkable, that
   although God even in the beginning made her perfect by infused grace,
   so that she was at once entirely purified in her affections,
   illuminated and peaceful in her intellect, and transformed in all
   things by his sweet love, yet it was the will of God, that the divine
   justice should be observed in the mortification of all her senses,
   which, although they were already mortified, so far as regarded the
   consent to any natural inclinations, even the slightest, yet the Lord
   allowed her to see what these were, and therefore, she very carefully
   opposed them.

   She was sometimes asked, when practising such mortifications of all
   her senses: "Why are you doing this?" And she answered: "I do not
   know, but I feel myself interiorly and irresistibly drawn to do so,
   and I believe that this is the will of God; but it is not his will
   that I should have any object in it." And it seemed indeed to be the
   truth, for, at the end of four years, all these mortifications ended,
   so that if she still wished to practice them, she could no longer have
   done so.

   At that time, listening one day to a sermon in which the conversion of
   Mary Magdalen was narrated, she heard a voice in her heart saying: "I
   understand;" and by her correspondence with the preaching, she
   perceived her conversion to have been like that of Magdalen.

   How she was withdrawn by God from the use of her senses. Of three
   rules given her by the Lord, and of certain words chosen from the Our
   Father and Hail Mary, and from the whole of the Holy Scripture. 

   After the four years above mentioned, her mind became clear and free,
   and so filled with God that nothing else ever entered into it. At mass
   and instructions her bodily senses were closed; but interiorly, in the
   divine light, she saw and heard many things, being wholly absorbed in
   secret delights; and it was not in her power to do otherwise.

   It is wonderful, that with all this interior occupation, God did not
   allow her to depart from the usual order. Whenever it was needful, she
   returned to her accustomed mode of life, answered the questions put to
   her, and thus she gave no cause of complaint to any one.

   She was sometimes so lost in the sense of divine love, that she was
   obliged to hide herself, for she was like one dead. In order to escape
   such a condition, she endeavored to remain in the company of others,
   and said to her Lord: "I wish not, O sweet Love, for that which
   proceeds from thee, but for thyself alone!" She wished to love God
   without soul and without body, and unsustained by them, with a direct,
   pure, and sincere, love; but the more she shunned these consolations,
   the more her Lord bestowed them upon her. Sometimes she was found in a
   remote place, prostrate on the earth, her face covered with her hands,
   so completely lost in the sweetness of divine love, that she was
   insensible to the loudest cry.

   At other times she would walk back and forth, as if lost to self, and
   following the attraction of love.

   Sometimes, when she had been thus lifeless for the space of six hours,
   she would be aroused suddenly by the voices of persons calling her,
   and attend to their smallest wants, for she abandoned as hateful all
   right to self. On these occasions she came forth from her retirement,
   with a glowing countenance, like a cherub ready to exclaim: "Who will
   separate me from the love of God," with all the other words of that
   glorious apostle.

   Her love once said to her interiorly: "My daughter, observe these
   three rules, namely: never say I will or I will not. Never say mine,
   but always ours. Never excuse yourself, but always accuse yourself."
   Moreover he said to her: "When you repeat the `Our Father' take always
   for your maxim, Fiat voluntas tua, that is, may his will be done in
   everything that may happen to you, whether good or ill; from the `Hail
   Mary' take the word Jesus, and may it be implanted in your heart, and
   it will be a sweet guide and shield to you in all the necessities of
   life. And from the rest of Scripture take always for your support this
   word, Love, with which you will go on your way, direct, pure, light,
   watchful, quick, enlightened, without erring, yet without a guide or
   help from any creature; for love needs no support, being sufficient to
   do all things without fear; neither does love ever become weary, for
   even martyrdom is sweet to it. And, finally, this love will consume
   all the inclinations of the soul, and the desires of the body, for the
   things of this life."

   How even her humanity was affected by the burning fire of this love;
   how much she desired to die, and took delight in hearing masses,
   bells, and offices, for the dead. 

   When the use of her senses and facilities was thus lost, in her
   spiritual joy she said to her humanity: "Are you satisfied with being
   thus fed?" And humanity answered: "Yes," and that she would sacrifice
   every enjoyment in this life for it. What must have been the joys of
   the soul, if even humanity, so contrary to the spirit, also took
   delight in peace and union with God?

   This was the case from the beginning, but at last, that burning,
   interior flame burst forth, and caused a corresponding suffering in
   the body, so that she was often obliged to press her hand upon her
   heart for relief. She could not have endured these pains for two
   successive days, and after their intensity had passed away, her heart
   was left melted in a divine and wonderful sweetness.

   God allowed her to remain for some days, in this state, and then
   permitted her to be assailed by another and still more violent attach,
   so that humanity, rather than take food, would have suffered
   martyrdom; therefore, when she looked on the dead, or heard offices
   and masses, or even a passing bell, she rejoiced as if she were going
   to behold that truth which she experienced in her heart; and she would
   rather have died than live separated from those things in which she
   found her support and consolation.

   She became reduced to such a condition, that she had no rest but when
   she slept; and then she felt herself freed from prison, because her
   attention was not so continually riveted on God. Her desire for death
   remained for nearly two years, and she was always asking for it,
   saying: "O cruel death, why do you keep me so anxiously waiting for
   you?" This desire knew no why, nor how, and it continued until she
   began to make daily communion.

   Filled with this desire, she addressed death, as "Gentle death, sweet,
   gracious, beautiful, strong, rich, precious, death," and by every
   other name of honor and dignity that she could call to mind, and then
   added: "I find, O death, but one fault in thee, thou art too sparing
   of thyself to him who desires thee, and too ready for him who shuns
   thee; yet I see that thou dost all things, according to the will of
   God, which is without fault; but our irregular appetites do not
   correspond, for if they did so, they would rest on the divine will, in
   peace and silence, as death itself does, and we should have no more
   choice than if we were already dead and buried." But she said, it
   really seemed, if there were any choice for her, that death was the
   thing to be chosen, because thus the soul is secure from ever offering
   any hindrance to pure love, and is liberated from the prison of this
   wretched body and of the world, which, with all their power, are
   continually engaging her, in every way, in their own occupations,
   while she regards them as her enemies to which she is outwardly
   subjected.

   When she was performing cruel penances, the sensitive nature never
   opposed her, but was entirely obedient; but when inflamed with love,
   it was wonderful how restive it became, and how much it suffered. And
   for this reason, because in penances the spirit corresponded to
   humanity, and strengthened her for her share in the work, but
   afterwards, the spirit being separated from visible things, and God
   operating in it without means, humanity was left in abandonment, and
   suffered intolerably without any help. Humanity is indeed capable of
   penance, but is not capable of such burning love.

   But everything was regulated by her merciful God, with the highest
   wisdom, which enabled the body to endure the most severe penance, and
   to live and rejoice in these agonizing flames, without complaining;
   and no one can know how severe is this suffering, unless he has
   himself experienced it.

   How the Saint devoted herself to pious works, and served in a
   hospital. 

   In the beginning of her conversion she devoted herself to good works,
   seeking for the poor throughout the city, under the guidance of the
   Ladies of Mercy on whom devolved this charge and who, according to the
   custom of the city, supplied her with money and provisions for the
   poor. She cleansed their houses from the most disgusting filth, and
   she would even put it in her mouth, in order to conquer the disgust it
   produced. She took home the garments of the poor, covered with dirt
   and vermin, and having cleansed them thoroughly, returned them to
   their owners. It was remarkable that nothing unclean was ever found
   upon herself: she also tended the sick with most devoted affection,
   speaking to them of their spiritual as well as of their temporal
   affairs.

   She took charge of the great hospital of Genoa, where nothing escaped
   her watchful care, although her incessant occupations never diminished
   her affection for God, her sweet Love; neither did this love ever
   cause her to neglect her service in the hospital, which was regarded
   as a miracle by all who saw her. It is also remarkable that she never
   made the mistake of a single farthing, in the accounts of large sums
   of money which she was obliged to keep, and, for her own little
   necessities, she made use of her own little income.

   There was once in the hospital a very pious woman of the third order
   of St. Francis, who was dying of a malignant fever. She was in her
   agony for eight days, and during that time, Catherine often visited
   her, and would say to her: "Call Jesus!" Unable to articulate, she
   moved her lips so that it was conjectured that she tried to do so, and
   Catherine, when she saw her mouth so filled, as it were, with Jesus,
   could not restrain herself from kissing her, and in this way took the
   fever, and only narrowly escaped death. This, however, did not
   diminish her zeal in the service of the hospital, to which she
   returned immediately upon her recovery, and devoted herself to it with
   great care and diligence.

   Of her wonderful knowledge of God and of herself. 

   This servant of God had an almost incredible knowledge of herself. She
   was so purified and enlightened, so united with and transformed into
   God, her Love, that what she said seemed to be uttered not by a human
   tongue, but rather by one angelic and divine; which proves the truth
   that numble souls, thirsting after God, can often grasp what the mere
   human intellect can never attain or comprehend. She was accustomed to
   say: "If it were possible for me to suffer as much as all the martyrs
   have suffered, and even hell itself, for the love of God, and in order
   to make satisfaction to him, it would be after all only a sort of
   injury to God, in comparison with the love and goodness with which he
   has created, and redeemed, and, in a special manner, called me. For
   man, unassisted by God's grace, is even worse than the devil, because
   the devil is a spirit without a body, while man, without the grace of
   God, is a devil incarnate. Man has a free will, which, according to
   the ordination of God, is in nowise bound, so that he can do all the
   evil that he wills; to the devil, this is impossible, since he can act
   only by the divine permission; and when man surrenders to him his evil
   will, the devil employs it, as the instrument of his temptation."

   And hence she said: "I see that whatever is good in myself, in any
   other creature, or in the saints, is truly from God; if, on the other
   hand, I do any thing evil, it is I alone who do it, nor can I charge
   the blame of it upon the devil or upon any other creature; it is
   purely the work of my own will, inclination, pride, selfishness,
   sensuality, and other evil dispositions, without the help of God I
   should never do any good thing. So sure am I of this, that if all the
   angels of heaven were to tell me I have something good in me, I should
   not believe them."

   This holy soul knew in what true perfection consists, and had,
   moreover a knowledge of all imperfections. There is nothing surprising
   in this, for her interior eye was enlightened, her affections
   purified, and her heart wholly united to God, her Love, in whom she
   saw things wonderful and hidden from human sense. She said, therefore:
   "So long as any one can speak of divine things, enjoy and understand
   them, remember and desire them, he has not yet arrived in port; yet
   there are ways and means to guide him thither. But the creature can
   know nothing but what God gives him to know from day to day, nor can
   he comprehend beyond this, and at each instant remains satisfied with
   what he receives. If the creature knew the height to which God is
   prepared to raise him in this life, he would never rest, but on the
   contrary would feel a certain craving, a vehement desire to reach
   quickly that ultimate perfection, and would think himself in hell
   until he had obtained it."

   Even at the beginning of her conversion, this holy and devout soul,
   inflamed with divine love, was wont to exclaim: "Oh! Lord, I desire
   thee wholly, for in thy clear and strong light I see that the soul can
   never be at peace until she has attained her last perfection. Oh,
   sweet Lord! if I believed that I should lose one spark of thee, I
   could no longer live." Again she said: "It appeared to me, as I noted
   from time to time, that the love wherewith I loved my sweet Love, grew
   greater day by day, and yet, at each step, I had thought it as perfect
   as it could be, for love has this property that it can never perceive
   in itself the least defect. But as my vision grew clearer, I beheld in
   myself many imperfections which, had I seen them in the beginning, I
   should have esteemed nothing, not even hell itself, too great or
   painful that would have rid me of them. In the beginning they were
   hidden from me, for it was the purpose of God to accomplish his work
   by little and little, in order to keep me humble, and enable me to
   remain among my fellow creatures. And finally, seeing a completed work
   entirely beyond the creature, I am compelled to say what before I
   could not say, and confess how clear it is to me that all our works
   are even more imperfect than any creature can fully understand."

   This holy creature was accustomed to use the words: "Sweetness of God;
   purity of God," and other beautiful expressions of the same kind.
   Sometimes she uttered expressions like these: "I see without eyes,
   hear without understanding, feel without feeling, and taste without
   tasting. I know neither form nor measure; for without seeing I yet
   behold an operation so divine that the words I first used, perfection,
   purity, and the like seem to me now mere lies in the presence of the
   truth. The sun which once looked so bright is now dark; what was sweet
   is now bitter, because sweetness and beauty are spoiled by contact
   with creatures. Nor can I any longer say: `My God, my All.' Everything
   is mine, for all that is God's seems to be wholly mine. Neither in
   heaven nor on earth shall I ever again use such words, for I am mute
   and lost in God. Nor can I call the saints blessed, nor the blessed
   holy, for I see that their sanctity and their beatitude is not theirs,
   but exists only in God. I see nothing good or blessed in any creature
   if it be not wholly annihilated and absorbed in God, so that he alone
   may remain in the creature and the creature in him.

   "This is the beatitude that the blessed might have, and yet they have
   it not, except in so far as they are dead to themselves and absorbed
   in God. They have it not in so far as they remain in themselves and
   can say: `I am blessed.' Words are wholly inadequate to express my
   meaning, and I reproach myself for using them. I would that every one
   could understand me, and I am sure that if I could breathe on
   creatures, the fire of love burning within me would inflame them all
   with divine desire. O thing most marvelous! So great is my love for
   God, that beside it all love for the neighbor seems only hypocrisy. I
   can no longer condescend to creatures, or if I do so, it is only with
   pain, for to me the world seems only to live in vanity."

   How impossible it was for vain-glory to enter the mind of this holy
   creature. Of the light which hatred of self gave her, and of the value
   of our own actions. 

   Vain-glory could never enter her mind, for she had seen the truth, and
   distrusting herself, placed her whole confidence in God, saying
   always: "Oh Lord! do with me what thou wilt." She had so little esteem
   of herself that it was pleasing to her to be reproved for any
   inclination she might have, nor did she ever excuse herself. So clear
   was the interior vision of that illuminated mind, and such deep things
   did she say concerning perfection that she could hardly be understood
   except by the most profound intellects. Among other things she said:
   "I would not wish to see one meritorious act attributed to myself,
   even if it were the means of insuring my salvation; for I should be
   worse than a demon, to wish to rob God of his own. Yet it is needful
   that we ourselves act, for the divine grace neither vivifies nor aids
   that which does not work itself, and grace will not save us without
   our cooperation. I repeat it; all works, without the help of grace are
   dead, being produced by the creature only; but grace aids all works
   performed by those who are not in mortal sin, and makes them worthy of
   heaven; not those which are ours solely, but those in which grace
   cooperates." So jealous was she for the glory of God, that she was
   wont to say: "If I could find any good in any creature, (which,
   however, is impossible) I would tear it from her, and restore it all
   to God."

   Of the revelation she had concerning purity of conscience, and of the
   opposition of sin to God. 

   Illuminated by a clear ray from the true light which shone into this
   holy soul she spoke admirable things concerning purity of conscience,
   saying: "Purity of conscience can endure nothing but God only; for he
   alone is spotless, simple, pure: of all things else, that is, of what
   is evil, it cannot endure even the smallest spark; this can neither be
   understood nor appreciated, if it be not felt." Hence she had ever in
   her mouth, as a habit, this word Purity: she had also a cleanliness
   and purity most admirable in her speech. She wished that every
   conception and emotion of the mind should issue to from it undefiled
   and pure, without the least complexity, and thus it was impossible for
   her to feign a sympathy she did not feel, or to condole with others
   out of friendship, except so far as she really corresponded with them
   in her heart. The continual humility, contempt, and hatred of self, in
   this soul were at this time most remarkable. When, by the divine
   permission, she suffered such mental distress that she could scarcely
   open her mouth, she would then say: "Oh, Love! let me remain thus,
   that I may be submissive; for otherwise it would be impossible that I
   should not do something wrong. Oh, how good and admirable is the
   knowledge of a soul, which, being all protected, united, and
   transformed in God, her felicity, sees clearly, on one side, her own
   inclination to all that is evil, and on the other, how she is
   restrained by God, that she may not commit actual sin! One thing is
   certain; namely, that never is the soul so perfect that it does not
   need the continual help of God, even though it be transformed in him.
   It is true, that the nature of the sweet God is such, that he never
   allows these souls to fall, although the soul, left to herself, could
   fall if she were not thus restrained. But he only preserves those who
   never with their free will consent unto sin; and allows those to fall
   who do voluntarily yield assent thereto; for truly, having given us
   free will, he will not force it. Consequently, those who fall into sin
   do so by their own fault, and not by that of God, who is ever ready to
   aid the soul even after her fall, if she will allow herself to be
   aided, and will correspond to the divine grace which never ceases to
   call her, saying: `Turn from evil and do good, and be converted to me
   with your whole heart.'"

   And therefore she said: "If the soul, fallen into what sins soever,
   corresponds to the grace of God and abhors her past sins, with a
   resolution and a will to sin no more, he immediately frees her from
   her guilt, and holds her so that she may not fall, nor through her own
   malice be separated from him, that is, from the observance of his
   commandments which are his will; to sin voluntarily, is to be
   separated from God. And not only is he ready, on his own part to do
   all this, but I see clearly with the interior eye, that the sweet God
   loves with a pure love the creature that he has created, and has a
   hatred for nothing but sin, which is more opposed to him than can be
   thought or imagined. I say, God loves his creature with a perfection
   that cannot be understood, nor could it be even by an angelic
   intellect which would fail to comprehend even its slightest spark. And
   if God wished to make a soul understand, it would be necessary to give
   her an immortal body, since by nature it could never endure the
   knowledge. For it is impossible that God and sin, however slight,
   should remain together, for such an impediment would prevent the soul
   from attaining to his glory. And as a little thing that thou hast in
   thine eye will not allow thee to see the sun, and as it is possible to
   compare the difference between God and the sun to that between the
   intellectual vision and that of the bodily eye, it is plain that the
   great opposition between the one and the other can never be truly
   imagined.

   "Wherefore, it is necessary that the soul which desires to be
   preserved from sin in this life, and to glorify God in the other,
   should be spotless, pure, and simple, and not voluntarily retain a
   single thing which is not purged by contrition, confession and
   satisfaction, because all our works are imperfect and defective.
   Whence, if I consider and observe clearly, with the interior eye, I
   see that I ought to live entirely detached from self; Love has wished
   me to understand this, and in a manner I do understand it, so that I
   could not possibly be deceived; and for my part I have so abandoned
   myself, that I can regard it only as a demon, or worse, if I may so
   say."

   "After God has given a soul the light in which she perceives the truth
   that she cannot even will, and much less work, apart from him, without
   always soiling and making turbid the clear waters of his grace, then
   she sacrifices all to him, and he takes possession of his creature,
   and both inwardly and outwardly occupies her with himself, so that she
   can do nothing but as her sweet Love wills. Then the soul, by reason
   of its union with God, contradicts Him in nothing, nor does aught but
   what is pure, upright, gentle, sweet, and delightful, because God
   allows nothing to molest it. And these are the works which please the
   Lord our God."

   Of the great and solicitous care which God operates in divers ways in
   order to attract the soul to himself, so that he seems to be in a
   manner our servant.--Of the blindness of man.--Of the many ways in
   which he is deceived by his own self-will. 

   "I see that the sweet God is so solicitous for the welfare of the
   soul, that no human being could have a like anxiety to gain the whole
   world even if he were certain to obtain it by his efforts; when behold
   the love he displays in providing us with all possible aids to lead us
   into heaven, I am, as it were, forced to say that this sweet Master
   appears as if he were our servant. If man could see the care which God
   takes of a soul, nothing more would be necessary to amaze and confound
   him than to consider that this glorious God, in whom all things have
   their being, should have so great a providence over his creatures; yet
   we, to whom it is a matter either of salvation or damnation, hold it
   in light esteem."

   "But alas! how can this be so? If we esteem not that which God
   esteems, what else should we esteem? O wretched man, where dost thou
   lose thyself? What dost thou with that time, so precious, of which
   thou hast such need? What with those goods with which thou shouldst
   buy Paradise? What with thy body, which was given thee to work for and
   to serve thy soul? What with thy soul, whose end is to be united to
   God by love? All these thou hast turned towards earth, which produces
   a seed whose fruits thou wilt eat with the demons in hell with
   infinite despair, because, having lost that glory for which thou wert
   created, and to which so many inspirations called thee, thou wilt then
   see that thou hast failed to secure it through thine own fault alone.

   "Know for a certainty that if men understood how terrible is even one
   solitary sin, they would rather be cast into a heated furnace, and
   there remain, living both in soul and body, than to support such a
   sight. And if the sea were all fire they would cast themselves therein
   and never leave it, if they were certain of meeting the sin on doing
   so." To many this will appear a strange saying, but to the saint these
   things had been shown as in truth they were, and such a comparison
   seemed to her but a trifling one; she added:

   "It has happened to me to behold something almost too shameful to
   relate, and this is that man seems to live quite merrily in sin; it
   astonishes me that a thing so terrible should receive so little
   consideration." She said again: "When I see and contemplate what God
   is, and what our own misery is, and behold the many ways by which he
   seeks to exalt us, I am transported beyond myself with astonishment.
   On the part of man, I see such a perversity and rebellion against God,
   that it seems impossible to bend his will except by the lure of things
   greater than those he enjoys here in this life. This is because the
   soul loves visible things, and will not renounce one but with the hope
   of four. And even with this hope, she would still seek to escape, if
   God did not retain her by his exterior and interior graces, without
   which man, whose instincts are naturally corrupt, could not be saved;
   for we are naturally corrupt, could not be saved; for we are naturally
   prone to add actual to original sin, and to continually tend toward
   earth for our satisfactions. And as Adam opposed his own will to the
   divine will, so we must seek to have the will of God as our only
   object, and by it to have our own disposed and annihilated. And as we
   cannot by ourselves discover our own evil inclinations, and our secret
   self-love, nor possibly annihilate our own self-will, it is very
   useful to subject our will to that of some other creature, and to do
   its bidding for the love of God. And the more we so subject ourselves
   for that divine love, so much the more shall we emancipate ourselves
   from that evil plague of our self-will which is so subtle and hidden
   within us, and works in so many ways, and defends itself by so many
   pleas that it is like the very demon. What it cannot effect in one
   way, it does in another, and this under many disguises. Now it is
   known as charity, now as necessity, justice, perfection, or suffering
   for God, or seeking for spiritual consolation, or for health, or as a
   good example to others, or a condescension to those who seek our
   advantage. It is an abyss, so deep and dangerous, that no one but God
   can save us from it. And as he sees this more clearly than we, he has
   great compassion for us, and never ceases to send us good inspirations
   and to seek to liberate us, not by forcing our free-will, but rather
   by disposing us in so many loving ways, that the soul, when she comes
   to understand the great care which God has taken of her, is forced to
   exclaim: `O my God, it appears to me that thou hast nothing else to
   think of but my salvation! What am I that thou shouldst so care for
   me? Thou art God who thus carest for me, and I am nothing but myself.
   Can it be possible that I should not esteem what thou esteemest? that
   I should not remain ever obedient to thy commandments, and attentive
   to all the gracious inspirations thou sendest me by so many ways?'"

   How she sees the source of goodness is in God, and how creatures
   participate in it. 

   "I saw," said she, "a sight which greatly consoled me. I was shown the
   living source of goodness in God, as it was when yet alone and
   unparticipated in by any creature. Then I saw it begin to communicate
   itself to the creatures, and it did so to the fair company of angels,
   in order to give them the fruition of its own ineffable glory,
   demanding no other return from them than that they should recognize
   themselves as creatures, created by the supreme goodness, and having
   their being wholly from God, apart from whom all things are reduced to
   pure nonentity. The same must be said of the soul, which also was
   created immortal, that it might attain to beatitude; for if there were
   no immortality there could be no happiness. And because the angels
   were incapable of annihilation, therefore when their pride and
   disobedience robed them in the vesture of sin, God deprived them of
   that participation in his goodness, which, by his grace, he had
   ordained to give them: hence they remained so infernal and terrible
   that none, even of those who are specially enlightened by God, can
   possibly conceive their degradation. He did not, however, subtract all
   his mercy from them, for had he done so, they would be still more
   malicious, and would have a hell as infinitely immense in torture as
   it is in duration.

   "God also is patient with man, his creature, while he remains in this
   world (although in sin), supporting him by his goodness, by which we
   are either tortured, or enabled to endure joyfully all grievous
   things, accordingly as he wishes to impart more or less to us. Of this
   goodness we sinners participate in this life, because God knows our
   flesh, which is the occasion of so much ignorance and weakness; and,
   therefore, while we are in this present life, he bears patiently with
   us, and allures us to him by hidden communications of his bounty: but,
   should we die in mortal sin (which God forbid), then he would deprive
   us of his mercy, and leave us to ourselves; yet not altogether so,
   because in every place he wills that his mercy shall accompany his
   justice. And were it possible to find a creature which in no degree
   participated in the divine goodness, it would be almost as bad as God
   is good.

   "This I say, because God showed me somewhat of his truth, in order
   that I might know what man is without him; that is, when the soul is
   found in mortal sin, at that time, it is so monstrous and horrible to
   behold, that it is impossible to imagine anything equally so.

   "No one need be surprised at this which I say and feel, namely, that I
   can no longer live in myself, that I am with a single motion of my own
   proper will, intellect, or memory. Wherefore, whether I speak, walk,
   remain quiet, sleep, eat, or do anything else, as if from my own
   proper self, I do not feel or know it. All these things are so far
   removed from me, that is, from the interior of my heart, that the
   distance is like that between heaven and earth; and if any of these
   things could by any mode enter into me, and give me such an enjoyment
   as ordinarily they produce, without doubt, I should be filled with
   misery, for I should feel it to be a retrogression from that which had
   formerly been shown me, and that it ought to have been destroyed. In
   this manner, all my natural inclinations, both of soul and body, are
   being consumed; and I know it to be necessary that all that is ours
   should waste away until nothing of it can be found; this is on account
   of its malignity, which nothing is able to overcome but the infinite
   goodness of God; and if it be not hidden and consumed, it will never
   be possible for us to be freed from this goad which is more than
   infernal, and which, so far as we are concerned, I behold to grow more
   horrible daily, so that one who was interiorly enlightened, yet had no
   confidence in God, would be driven to despair by the sight; so
   dreadful are we when compared to God, who, with great love and
   solicitude, continually seeks to aid us."

   It was still further shown to her in spirit how all the works of men
   (especially those which are spiritual), without the aid of
   supernatural grace, remain near God, without fruit, and are of little
   or no value. She saw also that God never fails to knock at the heart
   of man in order to enter therein and justify his works, and that none
   can ever complain that he was not called, for God is ever knocking,
   and not more at the hearts of the good than at those of the evil.

   How she was entirely transformed in God, and hated to say me or
   mine.--What pride is.--Of the error of man who seeks for plenty and
   happiness on earth, where they cannot be found.--What a misfortune it
   is to be without love. 

   And continuing her discourse, she said: "I have always seen, and I am
   ever seeing more and more clearly, that there is no good except in
   God, and that all lesser goods which can be found are such only by
   participation; but pure and simple love cannot desire to receive from
   God anything, however good it may be, which is merely a good of
   participation, because God wishes it to be as pure, great, and simple
   as he is himself, and if the least thing were wanting to this
   perfection, love could not be contented, but would suffer as if in
   hell. And therefore I say that I cannot desire any created love, that
   is, love which can be felt, enjoyed, or understood. I do not wish love
   that can pass through the intellect, memory, or will; because pure
   love passes all these things and transcends them." She said also:

   "I shall never rest until I am hidden and enclosed in that divine
   heart wherein all created forms are lost, and, so lost, remain
   thereafter all divine; nothing else can satisfy true, pure, and simple
   love. Therefore I have resolved so long as I live to say always to the
   world that it may do with my exterior as it wills, but with my
   interior this cannot be allowed, because it cannot, it will not occupy
   itself except in God, nor could it possibly wish to do otherwise, for
   he has locked it up within himself and will discover it to no one.

   "Knowing that with all his power he is continually striving to
   annihilate this humanity, his creature, both inwardly and outwardly,
   in order that when it is entirely destroyed, the soul may issue with
   him from the body and thus united ascend to heaven; in my soul,
   therefore, I can see no one but God, since I suffer no one else to
   enter there, and myself less than any other, because I am my own worst
   enemy."

   "If, however, it happens to be necessary to speak of myself, I do so
   on account of the world, which would not understand me should I name
   myself otherwise than as men are named, yet inwardly I say: my self is
   God, nor is any other self known to me except my God.

   "And likewise when I speak of being, I say: all things which have
   being, have it from the essence of God by his participation: but pure
   love cannot stop to contemplate this general participation coming from
   God, nor to consider whether in itself, considered as a creature, it
   receives it in the same way as do the other creatures which more or
   less participate with God. Pure love cannot endure such comparison; on
   the contrary, it exclaims with a great impetus of love; my being is
   God, not by participation only but by a true transformation and
   annihilation of my proper being.

   "Now take an example: the elements are not capable of transformation,
   for it is their nature to remain fixed, and, because this is the law
   of their being, they have not free-will, and it is impossible for them
   to vary from their original state. But every one who desires to remain
   firm in his own mind must have God as his chief end, who arrests every
   creature at that end for which he has created it, otherwise it would
   be impossible to detain it; it is insatiable until it has reached its
   true centre, which is God himself.

   "Now although man is created for the possession of happiness, yet,
   having deviated from his true end, his nature has become deformed and
   is entirely repugnant to true beatitude. And on this account we are
   forced to submit to God this depraved nature of ours which fills our
   understanding with so many occupations, and causes us to deviate from
   the true path, in order that he may entirely consume it until nothing
   remains there but himself; otherwise the soul could never attain
   stability nor repose, for she was created for no other end.

   "Therefore, whenever God can do so, he attracts the free-will of man
   by sweet allurements, and afterwards disposes it in such a manner that
   all things may conduce to the annihilation of man's proper being. So
   that in God is my being, my me, my strength, my beatitude, my good,
   and my delight. I say mine at present because it is not possible to
   speak otherwise; but I do not mean by it any such thing as me or mine,
   or delight or good, or strength or stability, or beatitude; nor could
   I possibly turn my eyes to behold such things in heaven or in earth;
   and if, notwithstanding, I sometimes use words which may have the
   likeness of humility and of spirituality, in my interior I do not
   understand them, I do not feel them. In truth it astonishes me that I
   speak at all, or use words so far removed from the truth and from that
   which I feel. I see clearly that man in this world deceives himself by
   admiring and esteeming things which are not, and neither sees nor
   esteems the things which are. Listen to what Fra Giacopone says about
   this in one of his lauds, that one which commences: O love of poverty.
   He says: What appears to thee, is not, so great is that which is;
   pride is in heaven; humility condemns itself. He says what appears,
   that is, all things visible and created are not and have no true being
   in themselves; so great is that which is, namely God, in whom is all
   true being. Pride is in heaven; that is, the true greatness is in
   heaven and not on earth; humility condemns itself, that is, the
   affections placed on things created which are humble and vile, not
   having in themselves any true being.

   "But let us consider more attentively this matter namely this human
   blindness which takes white for black and holds pride for humility and
   humility for pride, and from which springs the perverse judgment which
   is the cause of all confusion. Let us see what pride may be. I say,
   according to what I see with the interior eye, pride is nothing else
   but an elevation of the mind to things which surpass man and are above
   his dignity, and whenever man abandons that which is, and which knows,
   and which is powerful, for that which in truth has neither existence,
   knowledge, nor power, this is not pride.

   "This degrades him, and it generates that pride accompanied by
   presumption, self-esteem, and arrogance which occasions so many sins
   against charity for the neighbor; for man believes himself to be such
   as he appears in his disordered mind which is so full of miseries.
   Therefore God says to this proud man: If thou seekest, according to
   the nature of the created soul, for such great things as seem at
   present to be good and for that happiness which belongs to earth, know
   that they are not, they cannot satisfy nor afford contentment seek
   rather in heaven, where pride is lawful, and where it is not placed in
   things empty and vain, but in those which are really great, which
   always remain and which cause a sinless pride; but if thou seekest
   after worthless things thou shalt never find them and shalt lost those
   which thou shouldst have sought.

   "If man's eyes were pure, he would see clearly that things which pass
   away so quickly as do those which in this world are esteemed
   beautiful, good, and useful, could not truly be said to be so, such
   words being suitable only for things which have no end. Hence, man, if
   he prides himself upon temporal things, becomes unable to attain those
   that are celestial and eternal, degenerates into a vile and humble
   creature whose greatness is lost and who is degraded to the condition
   of the things he has always sought. Think, alas, what will become of
   this spirit so generous, created for the highest dignity and felicity,
   when it is immersed in the vile filth of its own depraved desires and
   held by its own demerits in abominations which will ever grow worse,
   but which will never end and which have no remedy? Alas! what pain,
   what anguish, and what desperate tears shall then be to this poor
   soul!

   "We see and know by experience that only two causes could enable the
   spirit to remain in a place of torture: one of these is force, and the
   other the hope of a great reward for such endurance. What despair then
   will not man suffer when the force which detains him in hell shall
   never cease, and the pain shall have no remuneration? It is certain
   that our spirit was created for love and for felicity and this is what
   it is constantly seeking in all things; it can never find satiety in
   temporal things and yet is ever hoping that it may there attain it.
   Finally it deceives itself and loses that time which is so precious,
   and which was given it that it might seek God, the supreme good, in
   whom may be found the true love and the holy satisfaction which should
   be its true satiety and full repose. But what will it do in the end,
   when, having lost all its occupations, and discovered all its
   illusions and its vain hopes, and lost all its time, it remains
   deprived of every good, and, though contrary to its nature, must
   forever remain forcibly deprived of all love and felicity? This one
   thing alone is so painful and terrible to contemplate that to speak of
   it makes me tremble with fear.

   "By this I comprehend what hell and heaven may be, because, as I see
   that man by love becomes one with God, in whom he finds all happiness,
   so, on the contrary I see that, deprived of love he remains as full of
   woes as he would have of joys (and that is infinitely) if he had not
   been so mad. Therefore, although we hear it said that hell is a great
   punishment, yet this does not appear to me to express it, nor can its
   gravity be truly told or comprehended, neither could it be represented
   to one as I understand it; only by the greatness of love in, the true
   and omnipotent God, can that which is opposed to it be measured.

   "When I consider the blindness of those who, for the sake of things so
   vile and little, allow themselves to be stupidly led away into the
   abyss of such horrible and infinite woe, all that is within me is
   moved by a great compassion. In this connection I recall a possessed
   person who was forced by a religious to declare who he was: he cried
   out with great force: `I am that wretch who is deprived of love.' He
   said this with a voice so piteous and penetrating that inwardly I was
   filled with pity, especially when I was hearing those words, Deprived
   of love."

   How contrary to pure love is even the slightest imperfection.--Of the
   many means by which God ministers to our salvation.--At the point of
   death we shall esteem the opposition made to the divine inspirations
   as worse than hell itself. 

   "I see clearly," said our saint, "that when pure love sees even the
   least imperfection in man, if the mercy of God did not sustain it, it
   would grind into powder not only the body, but even the soul itself,
   were it not immortal, knowing that so long as it is retained he must
   be deprived of love. I see that the cause of all these evils is that
   we are so blinded by the enormity of our sins that it is impossible to
   comprehend, as we should, the extremity of our misery, which is yet
   supremely necessary for us to know. When man is reduced to his last
   agony--and in that hour all joys flee from him and all evils present
   themselves without a remedy--I cannot find words to express the great
   pain and anguish which will then overwhelm his soul, and therefore I
   am silent.

   "O unhappy man, in that hour wilt see how much more solicitous God has
   been for thy salvation than thou hast been thyself! Then thy whole
   life will pass before thine eyes, with all its opportunities for
   well-doing and all its rejected inspirations, and in one instant thou
   wilt clearly see the whole. Believest thou that thy soul must still
   live when it passes from such injustice into the presence of true
   justice? It is not possible for me to dwell upon this thought, for I
   find it so painful; I am constrained to cry out, Beware, beware, for
   the matter is of such infinite importance. If I thought I should be
   understood I would never say aught else. When I see men die as the
   beasts die, without fear, without light, without grace, and know how
   serious a thing this is, I should suffer for my neighbor the greatest
   pains that I could ever feel, if God did not sustain me. And when I
   hear it said that God is good and he will pardon us, and then see that
   men cease not from evil-doing, oh, how it grieves me! The infinite
   goodness with which God communicates with us, sinners as we are,
   should constantly make us love and serve him better; but we, on the
   contrary, instead of seeing in his goodness an obligation to please
   him, convert it into an excuse for sin which will of a certainty lead
   in the end to our deeper condemnation.

   "I see that God, so long as man remains in this life, uses all the
   ways of mercy for his salvation, and gives him all the graces
   necessary to that end, like a benignant and most clement father who
   knows only how to do us good; and especially he does so in enduring
   our sins, which in his sight are so very great that if unsustained by
   his goodness, man would be ground into powder by them.

   "But man does not comprehend this, and God graciously awaits and bears
   with him until his death; then he resorts to justice, although not
   even then is it unmixed with mercy, since in hell man does not suffer
   according to his deserts, yet woe be to him who falls therein, for
   truly he suffers greatly. And when I see man fix his affections on
   creatures, even, as he sometimes does, on a dog or a cat, or any other
   created thing, delighting greatly in it, doing all that he can to
   serve it, unable to admit into his heart any other love, and as it
   were, breathing by it, I long to exterminate these things which hold
   him thus employed and cause him to lose the great reward of the love
   of God which alone can satisfy and make him happy.

   "Alas, this one word I will say about the just and holy ordinance of
   God, although I know not whether it will be understood. God has
   ordained man for beatitude, and that with more love than can possible
   be conceived, and all proper means to this result he gives him with
   infinite charity, perfection, and purity, so that man does not lose
   the least atom that is justly his; and, notwithstanding how many sins
   he may have committed, God never ceases to send him all needful
   inspirations, admonitions, and chastisements to lead him to that
   degree of happiness for which he created him with such heartfelt love.
   And he does this in such a way that when man shall behold it after his
   death, he will well understand that he never suffered himself to be
   led by the divine goodness, and that he has lost God solely through
   his own fault. Then the opposition he has made to such divine goodness
   will torture him more than hell itself; because all the pains of hell,
   however great they may be, are as nothing in comparison to the
   privation of the beatific vision which is caused by their own
   resistance.

   "This is proved by divine love, which says that it esteems the
   smallest imperfection a greater evil than any hell that can be
   imagined. What, then, shall be said of that soul which in all things
   finds itself opposed to the divine ordinations, except that infinite
   woe awaits it, infinite tribulations, dolors, and afflictions, without
   remedy, without consolation, and without end, and that it shall be
   plunged in profound humiliation and infernal gloom."

   That she understood her own nothingness, and therefore would not speak
   about herself.--Of her great faith in God.--How willful and malicious
   we are in ourselves, and how necessary it is to abandon all to God. 

   So great was the humility of this holy soul that she saw her own
   nothingness most clearly, and would never speak of herself, neither
   well nor ill. She said:

   "As to the evil, I know well that is all my own, the good I could not
   possibly do of myself, for nothing cannot produce something." Nor
   would she speak, as is customary, of being wicked, lest her lower
   nature might grow confident and presume upon the knowledge of its
   incapacity for good: and having such an opinion of herself, instead of
   desiring the esteem of others, she cut away even the root of
   presumption, saying:

   "I will never say anything about myself, either good or bad, lest I
   should come to esteem myself of some importance: and when I have
   sometimes heard myself spoken of by others, especially if I were
   praised, I have said inwardly: `If you knew what I am within, you
   would not speak thus.' And then, turning to myself, I say: `When thou
   hearest thyself named, or listenest to words which perhaps may seem to
   praise thee, know that they are not spoken of what is thine; for the
   only virtue and glory thou hast belong to God, and thou hast at least
   in thine earthly and carnal nature no more conformity with good than
   has the demon; but when evil is spoken of thee, remember that all
   could not be said which is in reality true; thou art unworthy even to
   be called worthless, because to speak of thee at all lends thee a
   fictitious value.'"

   Hence, knowing herself, all the confidence of this great soul was in
   God, in whom she was so grounded and established that it was hardly to
   be called faith, for she saw herself more secure in the hands of God,
   her Love, than if she were actually in possession of all the goods and
   felicities which it is possible to desire or to think of having in
   this world; and having placed all her trust in God, and given him full
   control of her, she covered herself under the mantle of his
   providential care.

   She became such an enemy to herself that nothing but necessity ever
   caused her to speak of herself at all, and she would never do so in
   particular but would generally say us; and she said: "The evil nature
   of man is pleased with being mentioned, and the greatest blow that can
   be given it is never to speak of it at all, and never make it of any
   account; therefore do not willingly name it in any manner." And to her
   own nature she said: "I know thee and rate thee as thou deservest:
   thou canst not advocate thy cause with me." And if an angel had come
   to say a word in favor of herself, she would not have believed him, so
   certain was she of her own malignity.

   And, having this clear knowledge of herself, she was constrained by it
   to accept with resignation whatever might befall either her body or
   her soul, so that whenever she found in herself any defect or any
   pain, she would say quickly: "These things are caused solely by my own
   evil nature, and of this I am so certain that I know not how I could
   produce other fruits than these which are so hateful. I never could do
   so if God did not assist me. But I know well, having been shown by God
   the imperfections and malignity of our own inclination, that we can
   never, except by the help of divine grace, do anything but evil. Good
   is as hopeless to us as to the demons, and even more so, for, unlike
   them, we have a body and a free-will which ally themselves to our
   depravity and do all the evil they can, which is more or less
   accordingly as God abandons us to our own control.

   "But, for one who desires to approach God, it is necessary to become
   the enemy of his enemies; and, as I find nothing that is worse than
   myself, nor that is more inimical to him, I am compelled to hold
   myself in more aversion than anything else whatever, and will even
   despise myself and count it to be worthless. And, on the other hand, I
   will detach my spirit from all the goods of both this world and the
   other, which I will henceforth regard as if they had no existence. I
   have implored God neither to suffer me to rejoice interiorly nor to
   grieve over any created thing, so that I may never be seen to shed a
   single tear. And I have begged him to take away from me the freedom of
   my will, so that I may no longer do what pleases me, but only what is
   according to his pleasure: all these things I have obtained from his
   clemency.

   "Now, seeing me thus determined, my self said to me: `Grant me, at
   least, the consolation of not hearing myself thus spoken of: for,
   whatever I am, it is necessary that I should exist in some manner.
   There is no creature which is not suitably provided for according to
   its needs, and I also am one of God's creatures.' Then the spirit rose
   up and answered: `Thou art indeed a creature of God, but thou art not
   according to God, and if thou wishest to be so thou must be first
   despoiled of all thou hast previously acquired, first by original sin
   and afterwards by the actual sins which thou hast freely multiplied,
   and which are more odious in the sight of God than thou couldst
   believe were it told thee. And when I see thee more covered with
   secret sins than a cat is with hairs, I know not where thou findest
   courage to say that thou art of God. If I were so mad as to feed thee
   according to thy inclinations, which are so corrupt and contrary to
   the purity which God requires, I should do two evil and perilous
   things: one is that I should never satisfy thee, and the other that
   thou wouldst every day grow stronger and wound me more and more
   acutely; and as I am myself full of evil, thou wouldst attack me
   secretly and in an apparently spiritual manner, and then no one but
   God could overcome thee. Speak to me no more of thy crafty designs,
   for I have determined to disregard thee.

   "'Recommend thyself to God that he may aid thee, and I also will
   assist thee by his help. Moreover, I will pray him to consume all thy
   perverse inclinations and to restore thee again to that primitive
   innocence in which he created thee, for otherwise thou canst never be
   satisfied: no one can satiate thee but he who created thee and who
   alone knows all thy secret desires and can grant them without
   difficulty. Cease, then, to seek for other satisfactions, for however
   abundant may be thy possessions thou wilt still remain poor and in
   want; when once thou art justified, all will be given thee which
   heaven and earth can afford.

   "Know then that I despise thee and would rather choose to be condemned
   to hell without thee, than to possess God through thy means. For a
   pure mind cannot suffer anything to come between itself and God, for
   it desires to possess him entirely and to be as pure and simple as he
   is himself. And this being so, how could it endure to be assisted by
   thee who art so hideous, and who would always glorify thyself
   unworthily over thy achievements? And although I know that such a
   thing could never be, it fills me with indignation to find that I have
   even imagined it or that any mind should ever conceive it possible!'

   "Thus scorned, my self knew not what to answer, and never more had
   courage to assert itself: it no longer looked either at the body or
   the soul, toward heaven or toward earth; but I saw it remain always by
   itself with all its malicious inclinations, and had God permitted it,
   it would have done more evil against him than Lucifer himself. Yet, as
   I saw that God continually restrained it, this sight gave me no
   uneasiness, nor did it ever cause me any torment or suffering. Rather
   was the effect directly contrary, for he who loves justice is rejoiced
   when robbers are punished, and surely he who, being evil by nature,
   desires to become good by his own efforts, is a robber worthy to be
   punished in hell-fire.

   "Hence, when I saw its malignant inclinations entirely subjected to
   God and by him executed and annihilated, I was greatly contented, and
   the more clearly I saw my own proper wickedness, so much the greater
   pleasure did I take in his justice. And truly, it appears to me that
   if I could fear anything it would be my own self--which is utterly
   evil; yet when I saw it in the hands of God I abandoned it to him with
   confidence, and never since then have I felt any fear concerning it;
   rather, I may say, that I never think about it and make no more
   account of it than if it in no way concerned me.

   "I saw others weeping over their perversities and their evil desires,
   and forcing themselves to resist them; yet, the more they strove to
   remedy their defects the more often did they fall. And when any one
   spoke of this to me, I answered `You have woes and you weep over them,
   and I have them and I do not weep. You do evil and you lament, and I
   should do the same if the almighty God did not assist me. You cannot
   defend yourself, nor can I do so either; hence it is necessary that we
   should yield ourselves to him who only can deliver us from evil, and
   he will do for us what is wholly beyond our power. And in this way we
   shall find rest from this our evil self, which is always torturing
   itself to its own destruction: yet when it is imprisoned by God, it
   remains submissive and in silence."

   In what manner God deals with one who corresponds with him.--And how
   the saint abhorred spiritual delights, and how God cast around her the
   chain of pure love. 

   This holy woman said that when God disposes a soul to correspond to
   him with her free will by placing herself wholly in his hands, he
   leads her to every perfection; thus has he dealt with one who, after
   she was thus called, never more followed her own will, but always
   stood waiting interiorly upon the will of God, which she so
   confidently felt to be impressed upon her mind that she sometimes said
   to him: "In all that I think, speak, or do, I trust in thee that thou
   wilt not permit me to offend thee."

   The following rule with regard to the intellect was given to this
   soul, namely: never to attempt to understand anything in heaven or on
   earth and, least of all, the spiritual operations in her self; and she
   obeyed so implicitly that she never more observed curiously anything
   in herself or in others.

   If it were asked in what manner the intellectual powers were employed,
   I should answer that all the powers of the soul were always under the
   command and in the service of God, and when anything had to be done,
   at that instant, and in so far as necessity required, it was given her
   to know what she should do, and then the door was closed.

   Of the memory she could give no account, for it seemed as if she were
   without memory and without intellect. This was not caused by any
   voluntary act of hers, but was the result of seeing herself so often
   and so suddenly moved to action, that she easily comprehended that it
   was God who was operating in her, and she remained occupied in him,
   and lost to all sense of time or place and without the will or the
   ability to do otherwise, except when God suddenly effected some change
   in her. Nor was she ever able to consider anything except what God at
   the moment proposed to her; in this manner she was attentive to
   whatever she was doing so long as necessity required, but when it was
   finished all memory of it passed with it.

   The same thing was true of her affections, which were taken from her
   by her Love even at the beginning, and in such a way that she could no
   longer love anything created or uncreated, not even God himself, at
   least as he was revealed in those sentiments, in visions, delights,
   and spiritual correspondences which all others who beheld them
   estimated so highly, but which she on the contrary held in horror and
   sought to fly from. But the more she sought to avoid them the more
   were they given to her, and they increased in such a manner that her
   body was often entirely prostrated by them. Her soul, however,
   remained pure and serene, as if it were passed beyond such violence,
   and were filled with divine sweetness. And when this was over, she
   seemed to be improved both in mind and body. Yet she had no desire for
   such improvement, and sought for nothing but God, her Love, in
   comparison with whom she rejected all, even that which proceeded from
   him, as being of less value, or indeed as nothing.

   This integrity of the will she held so cautiously and was always so
   hidden in God that no illusion, imagination or inspiration could
   interpose between them, nor even any truth which was not immediately
   from him.

   Therefore when God took from her the burden and the care of herself,
   her spirit found itself all light and able to do great things, and the
   instinct of love which God gave it when it was thus separated from her
   proper self, was so swift and great and powerful that she could
   satisfy it nowhere but in God. Then God, seeing her so disposed and
   well prepared, cast down from heaven one end of the cord of his most
   upright, pure, and holy love, and with it held her so closely occupied
   in him that she readily understood that she sprang from him and
   corresponded with him. Yet, in all this her humanity had no share, and
   neither felt, saw nor understood it.

   Thus she allowed this clear water to flow descending as from a living
   fountain; and by means of her love and of her great purity she saw
   every little defect which to her appeared offensive: and if it had
   been possible for her to tell the great importance of every least
   impediment to the divine love, even hearts of adamant would have been
   ground into powder by fear of them.

   How she did not desire love for God or in God, nor to have any medium
   between herself and God.--She could not see how love could be
   increased in her.--Of the peace of the soul transformed in God. 

   This holy Soul said that she never spoke of these great things to
   others without its appearing to her afterwards that she had told a
   lie--so weak were her words in comparison with that which she
   experienced through her pure and upright love. She said, therefore: "I
   do not wish a love which may be described as for God, or in God. I
   cannot see those words, for and in, without their suggesting to me
   that something may intervene between God and me; and that is what pure
   and simple love, by reason of its purity and simplicity, is unable to
   endure. This purity and simplicity is as great as God is, for it is
   his own." At another time she said that she never felt like speaking
   of this simplicity and purity of love, as if she had a sensible
   experience of it, because it is entirely ineffable and above the
   capacity of man; yet she had it in such abundance that, whatever might
   be alleged or even proved to the contrary, she could not understand
   how it could increase within her. This must be understood to mean
   that, being always replenished with love, she could neither see nor
   desire more than that which at any moment held her satisfied; this,
   however, did not prevent love from continually purifying and cleansing
   this precious and elect vessel, and from ever increasing and more
   abundantly filling her.

   And to prove this, she said: "Every day I felt myself lifted above
   those trifles which this pure love, ever harassing itself with those
   penetrating eyes that behold even those smallest imperfections which
   to other love appear perfection, was striving to cast out. This work
   is done by God, and man himself is not aware of it, nor does he see
   these imperfections; on the contrary, because such a sight would be
   insupportable to him, God shows him the perfected work as if it were
   without a flaw. Yet God does not cease continually to purify him,
   although he does it in a way not comprehensible to any intellect. It
   is written that even the heavens are not pure in the sight of God, by
   which it must be understood that such purity is not known, except by
   the help of a supernatural light which, without any assistance from
   man, works in him after its own pleasure, and ever cleanses him more
   fully until he is entirely pure. And this work God does secretly,
   because, when man yields himself wholly into the hands of God (which
   without divine grace he is unable even to wish to do), he can then see
   the enormity of even one trifling imperfection in the sight of God;
   and afterward, if he could see all those defects in himself which God
   is daily removing from him, he would be overpowered by his despair.
   Hence it is that these obstacles are gradually removed without man's
   cognizance, and God continually operates in us by his sweet goodness
   so long as we remain in this present life."

   When the good God calls us in this world, he finds us full of vices
   and sins, and his first work is to give us the instinct to practice
   virtue; then he incites us to desire perfection, and afterwards, by
   infused grace, he conducts us to the true annihilation, and finally to
   the true transformation. This is the extraordinary road along which
   God conducts the soul. But when the soul is thus annihilated and
   transformed, it no longer works, or speaks, or wills, or feels, or
   understands, nor has it in itself any knowledge, either of that which
   is internal or external, which could possibly affect it; and, in all
   these things God is its director and guide without the help of any
   creature.

   In this state, the soul is in such peace and tranquility that it seems
   to her that both soul and body are immersed in a sea of the
   profoundest peace, from which she would not issue for anything that
   could happen in this life. She remains immovable, imperturbable, and
   neither her humanity nor her spirit feels anything except the sweetest
   peace, of which she is so full, that if her flesh, her bones, her
   nerves were pressed, nothing would issue from them but peace. And all
   day long she sings softly to herself for joy, saying: "Shall I show
   thee what God is? No one finds peace apart from him."

   And as this process goes on, she is every day more profoundly plunged,
   immersed, and transformed in this peace, so that her humanity is every
   day more alienated from the world and from all things earthly and
   natural; and this in such wise that even the body no longer lives upon
   corporal food, and yet neither wastes away nor dies; on the contrary,
   this creature remains in health without using the means which are the
   cause of health, because it is no longer supported by nature but by an
   incomprehensible satiety which overflows into the body. And this is
   doubtless the reason why such a creature becomes so marvelous in her
   aspect, and especially in her purified eyes, which are like two ardent
   stars, enkindled in heaven, so that she appears truly like an angel
   upon earth.

   This love is of so generous and excellent a spirit that it disdains to
   lose its time in anything, however beautiful and precious, except its
   own purity and splendor, from which issue translucent rays of ardent
   and inflamed virtue. Thus is she ever occupied, and all things else
   she esteems as no longer appertaining to her.

   This work is constantly progressing, and every day the soul
   understands more clearly that the end for which man was created was
   truly for love, and to delight himself in this pure and holy love. And
   therefore when man has, by the assistance of divine grace, arrived at
   this desired port of pure love, he can afterwards do nothing (even if
   he wished or tried to force himself to do otherwise) but love and
   enjoy himself: this grace God gives to man in a manner so admirable
   and above every human desire or comprehension that without doubt,
   being still in this present life, he feels himself to have been made a
   partaker of the beatific glory.

   Of her earnest answer to a Friar Preacher who told her how much better
   he was prepared than herself for the divine love.--Nothing can hinder
   divine love, neither can it be deceived.--Also of its various
   conditions. 

   On one occasion a friar preacher, either to try her, or under some
   wrong impression, as often happens, maintained that he was better
   prepared for the divine love than herself, alleging as a reason, that
   on entering religion, he had renounced everything external and
   internal, and therefore he was more free and better prepared to love
   God than herself; and for many other reasons such as men can adduce,
   who are more learned than holy and devout, but especially because she
   was wedded to the world, and himself to religion.

   When the friar had said many things of this kind, an ardent flame of
   pure love seized the blessed Catherine, with which her heart was so
   inflamed, that she rose to her feet and fervently exclaimed: "If I
   believed that your habit would add one spark to my love, I would not
   hesitate to tear it from you, if I could obtain it in no other way.
   Whatever you merit more than I, through the renunciation you have made
   for God's sake, and through your religious life, which continually
   enables you to merit, I do not seek to obtain; these are yours; but
   that I cannot love God as much as yourself, you can never make me
   believe."

   She uttered these words with so much fervor and effect, that her hair
   burst from the band that confined it, and fell disheveled over her
   shoulders, so that, in her burning zeal, she seemed almost beside
   herself; and yet so graceful and decorous was her bearing, that all
   persons present were amazed, edified, and pleased; and she added:
   `Love cannot be checked, and if checked it is not pure and simple
   love."

   When she reached the house, she said, after the manner in which she
   was accustomed to speak familiarly with her Lord: "O Love, who shall
   prevent me from loving thee? not only in the world as I am" (meaning
   the married state), "but even if I should find myself in a camp of
   soldiers, I could not be prevented from loving thee. If the world, or
   if the husband could impede love, what would such love be but a thing
   of feeble virtue and mean capacity? As for me I know by what I have
   experienced that divine love can be conquered or impeded by nothing.
   It conquers all things."

   Catherine did not intend to say that the path to perfect love was as
   easy to seculars as to religious: but what she said applied only to
   perfect and pure love; because such a love breaks through all
   restraints and conquers all difficulties.

   On being told that she might be deceived by the devil, she replied: "I
   cannot believe that a love which has nothing of self in it can ever be
   deceived." And God communicated to her interiorly, that she was in the
   right, saying to her, that if it were possible for one to love even
   the devil with pure love, free from everything pertaining to self,
   malignant and odious as he is, he could not harm this soul, for pure
   love has such virtue that it would deprive him of his malignity. If,
   then, pure love has such power over one so wicked, who can doubt of a
   soul who possesses it? For if pure and simple love in any creature
   could be deceived, God cannot be.

   Catherine being on one occasion greatly troubled and oppressed by her
   humanity, because she had consented, in order to sustain a feeble and
   infirm life, to use things lawful and permitted, God thus instructed
   her concerning these things: "I never wish you to turn your eyes
   towards anything but love, and there rest, unmoved by any novelty that
   may present itself, within and without, but be like one dead to all
   things; because he who trusts in me must never doubt himself. For all
   the reasoning, cogitations, alternations, and doubts, which man has
   concerning the spirit, proceed from that very evil root of self, for
   pure love transcends all human thoughts, and will not live in the
   soul, still less in the body of man according to their nature, but
   will do all things above the capacity of that nature, and all that it
   thinks and speaks is always above nature."

   That God does not wish man to serve him through self-interest or
   through fear, but only through faith and love, and therefore he
   sweetly attracts his will.--The saint did not desire grace or mercy,
   but only justice.--That pure love fears nothing but sin. 

   This holy Soul being (as may be inferred from what has been already
   said) arrived at that state of perfection where she began to taste the
   fruition of eternal happiness, and regarding those who are still
   deceived by the passions of the present time, and know not how to
   hasten from that which is so wholly evil, was moved by compassion, and
   she said:

   "O man, created in such great dignity, why dost thou lose thyself in
   things so vile? If thou shouldst consider well, thou wouldst easily
   see that all worldly things which thou desirest are as nothing when
   compared to those spiritual goods which God gives thee even in this
   life, which is so full of ignorance. Pray that thou mayst come
   hereafter to that celestial country in which are things which eye hath
   not seen nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man
   to conceive what God hath prepared for them that love him!"

   If man clearly saw that by well-doing he could gain eternal life, and
   could imagine how great the happiness of heaven will be, he would
   always persevere in good; and even should he live until the end of the
   world, he would never occupy his memory, intellect, or will on any but
   celestial things. But God wishes that faith should be meritorious, and
   not that man should serve him through self-interest; and therefore he
   conducts him by degrees, although he always gives him sufficient
   knowledge to support his faith. But afterwards he gives him such
   aforetaste of eternal glory, that by a clear and certain perception
   which he receives at the close of this life, the faith of the man,
   thus replenished with heavenly delights almost ceases to be faith.

   On the other hand, if man could know how greatly he must suffer
   hereafter for his sins, hold it for certain that for very fear he
   would not only abandon all things, but that he would not commit the
   smallest sin. But God does not wish to be served through fear,
   because, if man's heart were filled with terror, love could find no
   entrance there. It is through love that God does not permit man to
   behold this dreadful sight, although he does in part discover it to
   those who are so protected and occupied with that pure love which
   casteth out fear that the doors cannot be shut against them. These
   souls see in heaven and earth things which tongue cannot express, and
   they are drawn by sweet allurements and gentle ways. This is what
   happens to those who allow themselves to be led by faith, and who,
   recognizing the benignant hand of God in all that befalls them, never
   reject it, but rather cleave to it strongly and follow it with joy.

   But those who refuse so much goodness and deliberately persevere in
   living according to their own desires, will have at the moment of
   their death a vision so painful and so terrible, that, having in
   themselves even one defect, they will be unable to endure the sight.
   And, therefore amazed at such stupidity, the saint exclaimed: "O
   miserable man, who will not provide against a fate so unhappy, and
   caused only by thine own obstinacy! Thou thinkest not of it, yet know
   that it will befall thee when it is too late. In heaven nothing can
   enter which is defiled, and purgatory must cleanse thee before thou
   canst attain eternal felicity."

   "God," she said, "leads man by a road intermediate between these two.
   He shows him always great tokens of his love, in order to attract man,
   who is naturally more inclined to act through love than fear. Yet he
   gives him also the motive of fear, that by it he may more readily
   abandon his sins. But neither the love nor the fear which God grants
   him are so great as to force man towards him, because it is his will
   that grace should be accomplished by free-will and faith, by which man
   does all that is within his power. The rest God effects by his good
   inspirations, which, when once man has yielded his consent, easily
   incite him to combat his rebellious nature, and, by the help of the
   great satisfaction which God imparts, to hold it at its true value."

   And therefore she said: "When I see that God is ever ready to give us
   all the interior and exterior aids necessary for our salvation, and
   that he observes our deeds solely for our own good; when, on the other
   hand, I see man continually occupied in useless things, contrary to
   himself and of no value; and that at the hour of death God will say to
   him: `What is there, O man, that I could have done for thee which I
   have not done?' and that man will clearly know this to be true; I
   believe that he will have to render a stricter account for this than
   for all other sins, and I am amazed and cannot understand how man can
   be so mad as to neglect a thing of such vast and extreme importance."

   The vision which she had of all this was not represented to her mind
   in a manner so weak as that in which it is here recounted, but so
   clearly that it seemed to her that she could see and touch it. And
   doubtless he who should behold such a sight would rather choose death
   itself than offend God voluntarily, even in the least degree. This,
   however, did not cause her such wonder when she considered the great
   evils from which men are freed and the eternal joys to which they are
   destined and sweetly guided. Therefore she held herself in great
   aversion and did not hesitate to say: "In this life I desire neither
   grace nor mercy, but only justice and vengeance upon the evil-doer."
   She said this with much earnestness, because she saw that the mercy
   and goodness of God toward his elect infinitely surpass their
   gratitude toward him and their sorrow for their sins, and therefore
   she could not endure that her own offences against her Love should go
   unpunished.

   This appeared to be the reason why she cared little about gaining
   plenary indulgences; not that she did not hold them in great reverence
   and devotion, or esteem them of great value, but that for her own part
   she would rather be chastised and receive the just punishment assigned
   her, than by this satisfaction be released in the sight of God. The
   Offended seemed to her to be of such goodness, and the offender so
   much opposed to him in all things, that she could not endure to see
   anything which was not subjected to the divine justice, that so it
   might be well chastised. And, therefore, to abandon all hope of
   escaping this righteous pain she did not seek for plenary indulgences
   nor even recommend herself to the prayers of others, in order that she
   might be ever subject, and be punished and condemned as she had
   deserved.

   What has just been said can be comprehended in the state of perfection
   to which the saint had been raised, and in which, being as it were
   secure of victory, she desired to combat purely for the greater glory
   of her Lord, and, like a valiant soldier, neither sought for nor
   desired any assistance. And being unable to support the sight of an
   offence against God, she said to him:

   "My Love, I can endure all things else, but to have offended thee is a
   thing so dreadful and unbearable to me that I pray thee to let me
   suffer anything else than to see that I have done so. The insults that
   I have offered thee I am sorry to have offered, nor can I ever consent
   to offend thee more. At the hour of death show me rather all the
   demons with all their plains, for I would think it nothing in
   comparison with the sight of one offense against thee, however slight;
   though nothing could be slight which displeased thine infinite
   majesty.

   "I know for certain that if the soul which truly loves, should behold
   in herself one thing which separated her from God, her Spouse, her
   body would be ground into powder. This I know by means of the extreme
   and unspeakable torments which I suffer from the interior fire which
   burns within me; and hence, I conclude that love cannot endure even
   the least opposition, nor will it remain with any one who does not
   first remove all obstacles and impediments in order to remain with it
   in peace and perfect quiet."

   How she was disposed toward God and toward her neighbor.--What pure
   and simple love is. 

   This holy Soul was so regulated by God, that in all that was necessary
   and reasonable she satisfied every one; and although she was entirely
   employed in serving her sweet Love, yet she was never willing to
   displease her neighbor either in word or deed, but on the contrary
   always assisted him as far as she was able. She said, however, to her
   Lord: "Thou hast commanded me to love my neighbor, and I am unable to
   love any one but thee, or to admit any partner with thee: how then
   shall I obey thee?" And interiorly he responded thus: "He who loves me
   loves also all whom I love. It suffices that for the welfare of the
   neighbor thou shouldst do all that is necessary for his soul and body.
   Such a love as this is sure to be without passion; because it is not
   in himself but in God that the neighbor should be loved."

   Speaking afterwards on this subject, she said: "Before God created
   man, love was pure and simple, free from all taint of self-interest,
   and needing no restraint. And in creating man, God was moved by no
   other cause except his pure love. In all that he did for him he had no
   other motive or object. And as his love allows nothing to prevent it
   from doing all possible good to its beloved, and attends to nothing
   which is not necessary to that end, so the love of man should return
   to God all that it receives from him; and then, having no respect to
   anything but love, it will fear nothing, because it never seeks its
   own advantage."

   She said again: "Not only is pure love incapable of suffering, but it
   cannot even comprehend what suffering or pain can be, nor understand
   the wicked actions which it sees others do. And, were it possible for
   it to feel all the pains which are felt by the devils and the damned
   souls, it could never say that they were pains; because, in order to
   feel or comprehend pain, it truly is necessary to be without this
   love.

   "The true and pure love is of such force that it cannot be diverted
   from its object, nor can it see or feel anything else. Hence it is
   useless toil to try to make such creatures employ themselves in the
   things of this world, for with regard to them they are as insensible
   as if they were dead.

   "It is impossible to describe this love in words or figures which will
   not, in comparison with the reality, seem entirely false. This only
   can be understood, namely, that the human intellect is unable to
   comprehend it. And to him who seeks to know what it is that I know and
   feel, I can only reply that it transcends all utterance."

   Of her vocation, which was like that of St. Paul.--That she was freed
   from suffering by her great love.--How terrible is man without
   grace.--How great is the stain of even one slight defect, and still
   more that of a sin. 

   The vocation and the correspondence of this holy Soul were like those
   of the glorious apostle St. Paul; that is, that in one instant (as was
   narrated in the beginning), she was made perfect. And this was
   evident, because in that instant and ever thereafter she proceeded not
   like a beginner but like one already perfect; for this reason she
   never knew how to give any account of the way to obtain perfection,
   because she herself had never attained it by acquired virtues, but
   simply by infused grace, which instantaneously wrought in her such
   effects as usually require the uninterrupted exercises of a whole
   life.

   And being thus transformed in God, the fire of love which burned in
   her purified heart was as great at the beginning as at the end of her
   conversion--which was a miraculous thing. She said that after she was
   called and wounded with love she never experienced any suffering,
   either interior or exterior, either from the world, the devil, or the
   flesh, or from any other cause. This was the effect of her interior
   transformation in God, so that although many adversities befell her,
   nevertheless she never found her will opposed to them, but on the
   contrary she received all things as from God, and, thus mingled with
   his love, nothing failed to please her. Her humanity, too, was so
   subjected to the spirit that it never rebelled, although it was
   obliged to perform many penances; so that in her was fulfilled that
   saying: My heart and my flesh have rejoiced in the living God (Psalm
   lxxxiii).

   And therefore she said: "When I see the greatness of the spiritual
   operation, and behold how important is any offence against God or his
   grace, I find it impossible to conceive of any other suffering or any
   other hell, than to have sinned against him. All other pains which it
   is possible to endure in this life, are consolations in comparison
   with this; just as, on the other hand, all things inferior to God
   which may seem to have a sort of goodness are yet, in comparison with
   him, only evil; this however, I know well, will hardly be understood
   by him who does not know it by experience.

   "On the other hand, I know not how man can be so blind as not to see
   that unless God sustains us by his grace, we are full of sorrow,
   bitterness, wrath, discontent, and woe, even in this present life,
   where, however, we are never entirely abandoned by him, no matter how
   great our sins may be. For, if a man could possibly live this mortal
   life, when entirely forsaken by God (excepting only the divine
   justice, failing which he would be annihilated,) I am certain that
   whoever beheld such a being would die. And not only he who beheld him,
   but he who, though far removed from him, should learn of his existence
   and comprehend the misery of his state, would also be deprived of
   life. To be abandoned by God is a thing too terrible and vast for
   human words to express, or human intellects to comprehend.

   "Alas! with how many perils is man surrounded in this life! When I
   consider of what great importance are spiritual life and death, if God
   did not sustain me I believe that I should die. If I could have any
   desire, it would be that of expressing all that I feel and know
   concerning this; and if it were granted me to demonstrate what I wish
   by martyrdom, I do not believe I could find any torments which I would
   not joyfully undergo, if so I might warn man of the importance of this
   truth.

   "When I beheld that vision in which I saw the magnitude of the stain
   of even one least sin against God, I know not why I did not die. I
   said: `I no longer marvel that hell is so horrible, since it was made
   for sin; for even hell (as I have seen it) I do not believe to be
   really proportionate to the dreadfulness of sin; on the contrary, it
   seems to me that even in hell God is very merciful, since I have
   beheld the terrible stain caused by but one venial sin. And what, in
   comparison to that, would be a mortal sin? And then so many mortal
   sins? Surely, if any one could behold all this, even if he were
   immortal, anguish would once more make him mortal. Even that slight
   and solitary vision which I beheld, and which lasted but an instant,
   if it had continued but a little longer would have destroyed my body
   had it been made of adamant.'

   "But all that I can say concerning it seems false beside what I truly
   comprehend. For this vision brought me so near death that my blood
   congealed and my whole body was so enfeebled that I seemed to be
   passing beyond this life; but the goodness of God desired that I
   should live to narrate it.

   "And afterwards I said: `I no longer wonder that purgatory is as
   terrible as hell, since one is to punish and the other to cleanse:
   both of them are made for sin, which is so horrible that both its
   punishment and its purgation must needs correspond with it in horror.'
   Man could understand this if he considered his evil inclinations, and
   how wretched he is when left to himself. But God does not permit this
   vision to be seen except by those who are, as it were, confirmed in
   grace, and even these he allows to see only so much as will be for
   their own good and that of others. And he shows them also that
   goodness which rescues man from these great and incomprehensible
   perils to which he is subject,, although he beholds them not; but God
   knows them and their importance, and therefore the great love he bears
   us moves him to compassion, and so long as we are in this life he
   never ceases to incite us to well-doing, in order that we may not be
   more deeply plunged into evil."

   From this may be seen how it was that the conversion of this Soul was
   accomplished, like that of St. Paul, who, rapt into heaven, beheld the
   glory of the just, while St. Catherine beheld the pains which sinners
   have merited by their crimes, how full of abomination they are, and
   how earnestly to be fled from.

   Of self-love and of divine love, and of their conditions. 

   This illuminated Soul said that she saw a vision of self-love, and
   beheld that its master and lord was the demon; and she said that
   self-hate would be a better name for it, because it makes man do all
   the evil that it wills, and in the end precipitates him into hell. She
   beheld it in man, as it were by essence, both spiritually and
   corporally, and in each of these ways it seemed so entirely
   incorporated with him that it appeared to her almost impossible that
   he should be purified in this life.

   She said also: "The true self-love has these properties: First, it
   cares not whether it injures either its own soul and body or those of
   its neighbor, nor does it value the goods and reputation of either
   itself or others; for the sake of accomplishing its ends it is as
   rigorous with itself as with others, and will submit to no possible
   contradiction. When it has resolved upon any action, it remains
   unmoved by either promises or threats, how great soever they may be,
   but perseveres in its course, caring neither for slavery nor poverty,
   for infamy nor weakness, for purgatory, death, nor hell, for it is so
   blind that it cannot see these things or recognize their importance.
   If one should say to man that if he would abandon his self-love he
   would acquire riches, gain health, possess in this world all that
   heart can desire, and be certain of heaven hereafter, he would yet
   repel them all, because his heart is unable to value any good, either
   temporal or eternal, which does not bear the impress of self-love;
   everything else he despises and counts for nothing, while to this he
   becomes a slave, going wherever it wills, and so submissive that he
   has no other choice. He neither speaks, thinks, nor understands aught
   else. If he is called mad and foolish, he cares nothing for it, nor is
   he offended by the derision or others. He has shut his eyes and closed
   his ears to all else, and holds them as if they were not."

   She said moreover: "Self-love is so subtle a robber that it commits
   its thefts, even upon God himself, without fear or shame, employing
   his goods as if they were its own, and assigning as a reason that it
   cannot live without them. And this robbery is hidden under so many
   veils of apparent good that it can hardly be detected except by the
   penetrating light of true love, which always desires to remain
   uncovered and bare, both in heaven and earth, because it has nothing
   shameful to conceal.

   "And, therefore, self-love never understands the nature of pure love;
   for pure love sees not how the things which it knows as they are in
   truth could possibly be possessed or appropriated; nothing would
   displease it so much as to find anything which it could call its own;
   the reason of this is that pure love sees not, nor can it ever see,
   anything but truth itself, which, being by its nature communicable to
   all, can never be monopolized by any. Self-love, on the other hand, is
   in itself an obstacle to truth, and neither believes it nor beholds
   it, but rather, confiding in itself, holds truth as an enemy and an
   alien.

   "But the spiritual self-love is much more perilous than the corporal,
   for it is bitter poison whose antidote is hard to find. It is yet more
   artfully veiled, and passes sometimes as sanctity or necessity, or
   again, as charity or pity, hiding itself beneath almost infinite
   disguises, the sight of which causes my heart almost to faint within
   me.

   "Behold also what blindness self-love occasions between God and man,
   and know that no evil can be so great as this; yet man does not
   perceive it, but seems to hold it as salutary, and to rejoice over
   what ought rather to make him weep.

   "There is no doubt that, if man could perceive the many difficulties
   thrown by self-love in the way of his own good, he would no longer
   allow himself to be deceived by it; and its malignity is the more to
   be dreaded because it is so powerful that were but one grain of it in
   the world would be sufficient to corrupt all mankind. Wherefore I
   conclude that self-love is the root of all evils which exist in this
   world and in the other. Behold Lucifer, whose present state is the
   result of following the suggestions of his self-love; and in ourselves
   it seems to me even worse. Our father Adam has so contaminated us that
   to my eyes the evil appears almost incurable, for it so penetrates our
   veins, our nerves, our bones, that we can neither say nor think nor do
   anything which is not full of the poison of this love--not even those
   thoughts and deeds which are directed toward the purification of the
   spirit.

   "For so great and hopeless an infirmity no remedy can be found but
   God, and if he does not heal us in this world by his grace, our
   defects must needs be cleansed hereafter by the fire of purgatory; it
   being necessary, before it is possible for us to behold the pure face
   of God, that we should be freed from all our stains. And, therefore,
   when I see how rigorous and severe is this purgation, and that it is
   not in man's power to escape from self-love, or to see and understand
   the dangers of its hidden venom as it is necessary that he should, I
   long to cry out in a voice that should even pierce the heavens, `God
   help me, God help me,' and continue this cry so long as life remains
   to me.

   "Consider, then, that if this love is of such force that it makes man
   regardless of life or death, heaven or hell, how incomparably greater
   must that divine love be, which God himself infuses by his great
   goodness into our hearts. This love, unlike the other, has an eye not
   only to the welfare of our souls and bodies, but to those of our
   neighbor, and is careful to preserve his honor and his goods. It is
   benignant and gentle in all things and to all men; it renounces its
   self-will, and accepts instead the will of God, to whom it always
   submits. God, moreover, by his incomparable love, so inflames,
   purifies, illuminates, and fortifies its will that it no longer fears
   anything but sin, because that alone displeases God; and, therefore,
   rather than commit the least sin, it would choose to undergo the most
   atrocious torments that can be imagined.

   "This is one of the effects of the divine love which gives man such
   liberty, peace, and contentment that he seems almost to enjoy heaven
   while yet in this life, and is so absorbed that he can neither speak,
   nor think, nor desire aught beside.

   "This divine love, which thus separates us from the world and from
   ourselves in order to unite us to God, is our only true and proper
   love. When, then, it has been thus infused into our hearts, what more
   can we desire in this world or in the other? Death becomes a thing
   longed after, and hell loses its terrors for the soul which loves; for
   it dreads nothing but sin, which alone can separate it from its
   beloved. Oh, if men, and especially those who love, could only know
   how great and heavy a thing it is to offend God, they would know it to
   be the greatest hell that could be suffered: he who has once enjoyed
   this sweet and gentle love, and lost it through any fault of his,
   would suffer agonies like those of the condemned souls, and esteem no
   toils too great by which he might once more regain it. Long experience
   has taught me that the love of God is our life, our bliss, and our
   repose, and that self-love is continual weariness, misery, and death
   both in this world and in the other."

   Concerning the three ways which God takes to purify the creature. 

   This holy Soul said: "I see three ways which God takes when he wishes
   to purify the creature.

   "The first is when he gives it a love so stripped of all things that,
   even if it desired, it could neither see nor wish for anything but
   this love, which by reason of its poverty and simplicity, is able to
   detect every vestige of self-love; and, seeing the truth it can never
   be self-deceived, but is reduced to such despair of itself that it is
   unable to say or do anything which could afford it either corporal or
   spiritual consolation. And thus, by degrees, its self-love is
   destroyed, since it is certain that he who eats not, dies.
   Notwithstanding this, however, so great is the evil of self-love that
   it clings to man almost to the end of his life. I have seen this in
   myself, for, from time to time I have found many natural desires
   destroyed within me which had previously seemed to me very good and
   perfect; but when they were thus removed I saw that they had been
   depraved and faulty, and in accordance with those spiritual and bodily
   infirmities which, being hidden from me, I had not supposed myself to
   possess. And this is why it is necessary to attain such a subtlety of
   spiritual vision, in order that all which at first appears to us
   perfection may in the end be known as imperfections, robberies, and
   woes; all this is clearly revealed in that mirror of truth, pure love,
   in which all things appears distorted which to us had seemed upright.

   "The second mode which I beheld, and which pleased me more than the
   first, is that in which God gives man a mind occupied with great
   suffering; for that makes him know himself, and how abject and vile he
   is. This vision of his own misery keeps him in great poverty, and
   deprives him of all things which could afford him any savor of good;
   thus his self-love is not able to nourish itself, and from lack of
   nourishment it wastes away until at last man understands that if God
   did not hold his hand, giving him his being, and removing from him
   this hateful vision, he could never issue from this hell. And when God
   is pleased to take away this vision of his utter hopelessness in
   himself, afterwards he remains in great peace and consolation.

   "The third mode, which is still more excellent than either of these,
   is when God gives his creature a mind so occupied in him, that neither
   interiorly nor exteriorly is it able to think of anything but God, and
   those things which are his. Even the works which it performs it does
   not think of or hold in any esteem, except in so far as they are
   necessary to the love of God; and hence it seems like one dead to the
   world, for it is unable to delight itself in anything or to understand
   anything, even if it wished to do so, either in heaven or on earth;
   there is given to it also such a poverty of spirit that it knows
   neither what it has nor what it does, nor does it make any provision
   for what it should do, either with regard to God or to the world, for
   itself or for its neighbor, because it is not shown how it may do so,
   but is always held by God in union with him and in sweet confusion.

   "In this way the soul remains rich, yet poor, unable to appropriate
   anything, or to nourish itself, because it is necessary that it should
   be lost and annihilated in itself, and thus find itself in God, in
   whom, in truth, it was from the beginning although it knew not how it
   was so.

   "There is also the religious life, of which I will say nothing
   further, because all must pass through one of these three ways of
   which I have been speaking, and also because it has been sufficiently
   treated of by others."

   The manner in which the saint was medically treated for bodily
   infirmity, when her suffering was from spiritual fire, and of other
   accidents that befell her. 

   The perfection of this saint, thus illuminated by God, the true light,
   could not be understood, for it did not manifest itself by outward
   acts but all her perfection was in the interior of her soul, in the
   view of herself and of her God, with whom she was united in an
   extraordinary manner, and also in secret interior conversations, some
   of which she repeated twice (although she could poorly utter them in
   words), not as they actually took place within, for they were
   unutterable, and she could only express them by similitudes.

   The state of this soul was not passive, as it is wont to be with
   others, forso profound was her sense of the importance of what she
   saw, that it inflamed her heart to such a degree that she fell
   dangerously ill. It is easy to perceive from this, how far such a
   creature was removed from the common experience. Usually, men hardly
   feel any compunction for the sins they have committed, and of venial
   offences they scarcely make any account; but the body of the saint was
   almost rent in pieces when it was given her to see the greatness of
   even a venial sin, and if God had discovered to her one of these sins
   in herself, she certainly would have fallen dead.

   Her sufferings were often so great that recourse was had to medical
   treatment, and letting of blood was ordered to relieve the burning
   fire of the spirit and restore the power of speech, but with little
   effect. Medicines were also administered when she seemed near her end,
   but they increased her suffering, although she took them in obedience.
   It then began to be understood that God was the author of these
   things, and she was left to struggle with her attacks without
   medicine, but it required great care and watchfulness to preserve her
   life. The devoted attendants who surrounded her were confounded, and
   she would sometimes say, in a voice scarcely audible: "Now my heart
   seems as if in ashes, I am consuming with love." At other times, to
   relieve her humanity, she would go into a solitary apartment, and
   there cast herself upon the ground, crying: "O love, I can bear no
   more;" and, writhing in agony, the house would resound with her cries
   and lamentations.

   Sometimes, when walking in the garden, she would address the plants
   and trees, saying: "Are you not creatures created by my God? are you
   not obedient to him?" And thus discoursing, she would obtain some
   relief to her sufferings, but if she perceived she was overheard, she
   suddenly stopped, and answered any one who spoke to her according to
   the necessities of the affairs of human life.

   Of the three things to which she could not consent, and of those which
   she could not refrain from desiring. 

   This soul had so close a union with God, and her free-will was brought
   into such subjection, that she felt no resistance nor choice, having
   conquered all things, more than humanity can comprehend; yet she said
   there were three things to two of which she could not consent, and a
   third which she could not but desire.

   In the first place she could not consent to, nor commit any, even the
   smallest, sin. For having the greatest horror of sin, and having
   attained, through the sight of her own misery, to the greatest
   simplicity, she did not perceive it in others, and could not
   comprehend how men could consent to it, particularly to mortal sin;
   and if perchance she saw with her own eyes some inexcusable sin, still
   she could not understand that there could be in man the malice of sin,
   believing that others honored God as she honored him.

   Secondly, and this, although obscure to the imperfect intellect, was
   clear to her, she could not unite with the will of God in suffering so
   cruel a passion, and she would rather have endured all the pains of
   all the souls in hell, than that her Love should suffer such
   punishment.

   The third thing, and it was this that she could not refrain from
   desiring, was holy communion; for the holy communion is nothing but
   God himself. And in this she testified the great reverence and honor
   in which she held priests, namely, by affirming that if the priest had
   not been willing to give her communion, she would have taken it
   patiently, and not persisted; but wishing to receive communion, she
   could not say that she did not wish it.

   Of the sweetness of the divine precepts, and the advantage of temporal
   adversity. 

   All things took place in this holy soul in the order of true love; and
   she sometimes said to her Lord: "O Love! If others are bound to keep
   thy commandments, I am bound to keep them by a tenfold obligation,
   because they are sweet and full of love. Thou dost not command things
   that lead to evil; but to him who obeys thou givest great peace, love,
   and union with thyself. This cannot be understood by one who has not
   experienced it; for the divine precepts, although they are contrary to
   sensuality, are yet in accordance with the spirit which, by its
   nature, seeks separation from all the bodily senses, by union with
   God, to which union I find every other love of things inferior to God
   to be a hindrance."

   She saw that all things are necessary which God ordains, who is only
   waiting to consume interiorly and exteriorly all our corrupt
   affections, and that all wrongs, injuries, contempt, sickness,
   poverty, abandonment of relatives and friends, the temptations of the
   devil, mortifications, and all else contrary to humanity, are
   especially needful to us, that we may combat with them, till at length
   gaining through them the victory, our corrupt affections may be
   extinguished, until adversity appears to us no longer bitter, but
   sweet.

   Whoever believes that anything good or bad can befall him, which can
   separate him from God, shows that he is not yet strong in divine
   charity; for man should fear nothing but to offend God, and all beside
   should be to him as if it were not. For herself, she said, that she
   seemed to see in her heart a ray of love proceeding from God, binding
   them together with a golden thread, and had no fear that it would ever
   be loosed; and this had been the case ever since her conversion. Her
   sweet Lord gave her such confidence that when she was moved to pray
   for anything, something within seemed to say: "Command, for love can
   do it." Indeed she had every thing she asked, with all possible
   certainty.

   She was wont to say: "The love of God is our proper love, for we are
   created for that alone; the love, on the contrary, for everything
   beside, ought in truth to be termed hatred, since it deprives us of
   our proper love, which is God. Love then God, who loves thee, and
   leave him who does not love thee, namely, everything beneath God; for
   all things are enemies to that true love. Oh! that I could make this
   truth be felt as I myself feel it: I am certain that there is no
   creature who would not love Him; so that if the sea were the food of
   love, there are no men or women, who would not drown themselves in it,
   and those who were at a distance from it would always be drawing
   nearer to it, that they might plunge into it; for every pleasure, when
   compared to it, is pain, and such riches does it confer on a man, that
   all beside should seem to him but misery.

   "It makes him so light that he does not feel the earth beneath his
   feet; his affections are so fixed on things above that he loses all
   sense of suffering here below, and he is so free, that there is
   nothing to keep him from the presence of God. If you asked me: `What
   dost thou feel?' I should answer thee: `What eye could not see, nor
   ear hear;' but I am ashamed to speak of it in my poor language, for I
   am certain that all I can say of God, is not of God, but only
   fragments that fall from his table.'"

   The process of annihilation of man in God illustrated by the figure of
   the eating of bread.--Of her interior and exterior. 

   "Take a loaf," said the saint, "and eat it, and after you have eaten
   it, its substance goes to the nutriment of the body, and what is
   superfluous passes away; for if nature retained it, having no need of
   it, the body would die. Now if that bread should say to the body: Why
   do you deprive me of my existence, for by my nature I am not satisfied
   to be thus reduced to nothingness? If I could, I would defend myself
   from thee, for it is natural for every creature to preserve
   itself,--the body would answer: Bread, thy being is designed for my
   support, which is more worthy than thee, and hence thou shouldst be
   more content with the end for which thou wast created, than with thy
   own being; for if it were not for thy end, thy being would have no
   value but to be thrown aside, as something worthless and dead. It is
   thy end which gives thee a dignity to which thou canst not attain but
   by means of thy annihilation. If thou wouldst live for thy end, thou
   wouldst care for thy being, but wouldst say: Quickly, quickly, take me
   from myself, and let me attain my end for which I am created."

   This soul became so detached, both exteriorly and interiorly, that she
   could no longer perform her accustomed exercises, for she had lost all
   vigor of mind and body. She had no desire to confess; but going to
   confession, as usual, she found that she had no part in any sin; and
   when she attempted to mention her offences generally, it seemed to her
   that she was deceiving; and through her entire detachment she was in
   possession of the greatest peace, of which she was never divested.

   The saint urged to give an idea of her state. 

   Of free-will this blessed one said, that when she considered carefully
   her vocation, she saw such great things effected by God in her, that
   it almost seemed as if she had been forced by him, for she could
   nowhere see her own consent, but rather it seemed to her that she had
   resisted, especially in the beginning, and the sense of this had
   inflamed her with a burning love. But generally, when speaking of it,
   she said: "God first arouses man from sin, then with the light of
   faith illuminates the intellect, and afterwards, with a certain
   satisfaction and zeal, inflames the will. And Almighty God does this
   in an instant, although we tell it in many words, and measure it by
   time."

   When the saint was sometimes urged by her spiritual children to give
   them an idea of her state in words, she would tell them it was
   impossible, but on one occasion she allowed a religious to interpret
   it, in order to gratify his desire to understand it better, which he
   did to her great satisfaction and joy; wherefore, with a benignant
   countenance, she exclaimed: "Oh my dear child, it is as you have said,
   and hearing you I feel that it is thus. You have said all that can be
   said, but the effect is incomprehensible." Then the religious said to
   her: "Oh mother, cannot you ask of God, your Love, some little drops
   of it for your children?" and she answered joyfully: "I see this sweet
   Love so gracious to his children, that I can ask nothing for them, but
   that I may present them in his presence."

   This creature became at length like a cherub to look upon, so that she
   gave great consolation to every one who beheld her; and those who
   visited her found it hard to leave her. When she was about sixty-three
   years of age, her heart was inflamed anew with a ray of love. This
   dart was so powerful and penetrating, that she felt as if severely
   wounded in the region of the heart, and she suffered great bodily
   pain. After some days she was again inflamed with love, and it always
   seemed to her that the last wound was the greatest.

   Of her compunction for having desired death, every desire being an
   imperfection.--She relates her conversion to one of her spiritual
   children. 

   In the year 1507, while present at the office for the dead, she felt a
   desire to die. It was a desire of the soul that it might quit the body
   and be united with God. The body also desired it, that it might be
   freed from the torment which it suffered from the flames of love in
   the soul; these however, were only natural desires, to which her will
   gave no consent.

   And as her desire was inspired by her Love who wished to purify her,
   and not from her will, as soon as she felt it, she suddenly exclaimed:
   "O Love, I desire nothing but thee, and in thy own way: but if it
   please thee, who dost not wish that I should die, neither that I
   should desire death, let me at least be present at the death and
   burial of others, that I may see in them that blessedness that is not
   bestowed on me." Love consented to this, and for some time she was
   present at the death and burial of all those who died in the hospital,
   without any desire to die herself. And by degrees, the union of love
   increasing in that purified heart, she lost the desire to see others
   die, but still, whenever she spoke of death, she seemed filled with a
   new and joyful emotion.

   At one time when she fell into ecstasies, and appeared as if dead, the
   persons around her, who did not understand her state, believed her to
   be suffering from what is commonly called vertigo. She herself,
   through humility and a desire to be unnoticed, on speaking of it to a
   religious, also called it vertigo: but the religious answered:
   "Mother, you need not use concealment with me: I entreat you for the
   honor and glory of God, to choose some person who will be satisfactory
   to you, and narrate to him the graces with which God has favored you,
   that when you are gone these graces may not remain hidden and unknown,
   and the praise and glory of God arising from them be lost." To which
   she answered: "It shall be as you wish, if it is the will of my sweet
   Love;" and she would choose no other than himself who had given her
   this counsel, although she knew it would be impossible for her to
   narrate the smallest part of those interior communications between God
   and the soul; and of the exterior, she had experienced almost nothing.

   At another time, in conversation with the same religious, she began to
   narrate her conversion and many other things, as well as she could,
   which have been faithfully collected and introduced into the present
   volume.

   How the saint left the whole care of herself to Love; and what means
   Love employed to purify her from her imperfections. 

   When Love had taken upon himself the care and control of everything,
   he never more abandoned it. "And I," said the saint, "gave the keys of
   the house to Love, with full power to do all that was necessary, and I
   took no heed of body or soul, friends, relatives, or the world; but of
   all that the law of pure love requires I took care that the least part
   should not be wanting. And when I saw Love accepting the charge, and
   producing the effect, I turned towards him, and was occupied in
   watching this, his work. And he made me look upon many things as
   unjust and imperfect, which before had appeared to myself and others
   as just and perfect, and in everything was found defects. If I spoke
   of spiritual things, Love suddenly checked me, telling me that I must
   not speak, but let the flame burn on within, no word and no act
   escaping which should serve to refresh either soul or body.

   "One day I asked my confessor if I should try to eat, that I might not
   cause any injury to the soul or body. Love answered me within, and my
   confessor from without: `Who is this who speaks of eating or not
   eating, under the form of a motive? Be silent, for I know you, and you
   cannot deceive me.' Finding his eye so acute and powerful, I gave up
   all to him, asking God to do with me what seemed to him good; to strip
   me of all things and clothe me with his simple, pure, powerful, great,
   and burning love.

   "And then Love exclaimed: `It is my will to leave every one naked,
   naked; neither will I have anything above me nor under me. And be it
   known to you, that such is my nature and condition, that I convert and
   change into myself all souls that can be changed, despoiling them of
   self.' Love will be alone. If another should be in his company, the
   gates of heaven would be closed against him, for they are open only to
   pure Love. Let each one, then, leave himself to be guided by Love,
   that he may be conducted to that end which pure Love desires all to
   attain.

   "Pure Love draws the soul to himself in a variety of ways, and when he
   sees her occupied with any affection, he marks all things that she
   loves as his enemies, and consumes them without sparing herself or her
   body; and although the nature of Love would destroy them by one blow,
   yet seeing the weakness of man, he cuts away little by little, and
   silently; for we cling so firmly to the object of our love, which we
   esteem beautiful, good, and just, that we will listen to nothing that
   opposes us; therefore Love says: `I will put my hand to the work, for
   with words I can do nothing; I will destroy all things that thou
   lovest, by death, infirmity, or poverty; by hatred and discord; by
   detraction, scandal, lies, and infamy; by relatives, by friends, and
   by thyself, till thou knowest not what to do, finding thyself cast out
   from all things that constituted thy delight, and receiving from them
   only pain and confusion; neither dost thou understand these operations
   of divine Love, all of which seem contrary to reason, both as regards
   God and the world; therefore thou dost cry and lament, striving and
   hoping to escape from this distress, and thou wilt never escape from
   it.'

   "When divine Love has kept a soul thus in suspense, and, as it were,
   desperate, and disgusted with all things that before she loved, then
   he shows her himself with his divinely joyful and radiant countenance,
   and as soon as the soul perceives it, naked and destitute she casts
   herself into his hands, crying: `O blind one, what didst thou seek?
   what hast thou desired! here are all the delights thou hast sought! O
   divine Love, how sweetly hast thou deceived me in order to strip me of
   all self-love and clothe me with pure love abounding with every
   delight! Now that I see the truth, I have nothing to lament but my
   ignorance.'"

   How well regulated was the saint in all things.--Of the opposition of
   her spirit to humanity, and how humanity tormented her. 

   With this blessed soul everything was so well ordered, that wherever
   she had control, or could offer a remedy, she never could endure any
   disorder; and she could neither live nor converse with persons who
   were not well regulated, especially if they were those who appeared to
   have entered with herself the way of perfection; and when she saw them
   countenancing any imperfection, and taking part in any of those things
   which she had learned to abhor, she left their company.

   She was very compassionate to all creatures, although merciless to
   their defects, so that when an animal was killed, or a tree cut down,
   she could hardly bear to see them lose the life that God had given
   them, but she would have been very severe in rooting out the evil from
   one who had brought it upon himself by sin.

   She could not see her own sins, or realize that she must sometimes
   commit them, neither could she believe that others would sin; and so
   entire was the peace of her mind, that it seemed to substitute for
   bodily sleep. Such repose was, however, more refreshing to her body
   than natural sleep, for sleep takes off the mind from God. She was so
   restrained interiorly, that she was wont to say: "If I uttered a word,
   breathed a sigh, or cast a glance towards any person who could
   understand me, my humanity would be well content, as a thirsty person
   when given a drink." Meaning by this that when she was pierced by the
   arrows of divine love, she lost all feeling and remained motionless,
   until God, as it often happened, relieved her from this occupation.

   So opposite and repugnant was the spirit to humanity, that when
   humanity wept, the spirit laughed, and held her in such subjection as
   to reprove her, not only for every unnecessary action, but for every
   word, not permitting those around to offer her any alleviation in her
   trials, seeming ever lovingly to mock her by exciting her desires for
   these things with which she was accustomed to console herself,
   allowing her to taste all things, and then suddenly destroying all
   relish for them, till by degrees she had none left for any earthly
   thing, and could find no exterior or interior nourishment, and in this
   desolation a secret longing would come over her to hide herself, and
   weep, and lament.

   Sometimes she would cast herself into the hedge of rose trees in the
   garden, and seize the thorns with both hands, without feeling the
   pain, so entire was the occupation of her mind. She would bite and
   burn her hands, to relieve the interior suffering that consumed her,
   and the most extreme external pain she esteemed as nothing. Her body
   was often so deserted by the spirit, that without any resistance on
   her part four persons could not move her from her seat. All these
   things were not done voluntarily, but by a spontaneous impulse;
   neither did she find any consolation upon the earth, but was
   constrained to shun those things without which others cannot live.

   She found no solace except in her confessor, with whom she had an
   interior and exterior correspondence. But he, too, was taken from her,
   and her sufferings greatly increased, because there was nothing to
   which she could have recourse either in Heaven or on earth, and she
   was wont to say: "I am in this world like one who is away from home,
   who has left all his relatives and friends, and finds himself in a
   foreign land; when having accomplished the business for which he was
   sent he is ready to leave and go home, where his heart and mind are;
   for so ardent is his love of his own country, that a day of absence
   seems a year."

   She felt herself every day more and more restrained, like one who is
   confined at first within the walls of a city; then in a house without
   a garden, now in a hall, now in a chamber, then again in an
   antechamber; sometimes in a dimly lighted, remote apartment, then in a
   dark prison, her hands tied, her feet chained, her eyes bandaged, and
   without food; for no one could speak with her and she was left without
   hope of release but by death; she had no consolation but the knowledge
   that it is a merciful God who does all this in his love; and with this
   she was satisfied.

   On one occasion, hearing some one repeat the words: "Arise, arise, ye
   dead, and come to judgment;" she cried aloud, in the excess of love:
   "Would that I could come now, now;" and all who heard her were
   astonished. With that burning love in her heart, it seemed to her that
   she could pass through the most searching judgment; for she saw
   nothing in herself for that judgment to condemn; she even took
   pleasure in the thought of it, for she earnestly desired to see the
   infinitely powerful and just judge, who makes all things tremble,
   except pure and simple love.

   How an evil spirit, that had possession of one of her spiritual
   daughters, named her Catherine Serafina. 

   This holy soul had, in the house with her, a spiritual daughter who
   was tormented by the devil, who frequently attacked her, even throwing
   her upon the ground, and by this violence driving her almost to
   desperation. This evil spirit even entered into her mind, and
   prevented her from thinking of divine things, so that it seemed to her
   that she was separated from God, and lost. She was beside herself, and
   fell so entirely under his diabolical will, that she became almost a
   demon herself. She was insupportable to herself, and found no peace
   except in the presence of her spiritual mother; for when they were
   together, at a glance they understood each other, one having the
   spirit of God, and the other its opposite.

   One day this afflicted creature, vexed by the unclean spirit, knelt at
   the feet of the blessed Catherine, in the presence of their confessor;
   and the devil through her said: "We are both slaves by reason of that
   pure love that thou hast in thy heart." and then, enraged with himself
   for having uttered these words, cast her upon the ground, winding
   about like a serpent. When she had risen from the ground, the
   confessor said: "What is the name of this woman, tell me," and the
   evil spirit answered: Catherine, and would say no more. Then the
   confessor said: "Tell me her surname, is it Adorno or Fieschi?" and he
   would not answer; but the confessor insisted, and he at length said:
   Catherine Serafina, but he uttered these words struggling with great
   agony.

   This afflicted being possessed a powerful intellect, and she lived in
   virginity. The Lord, perhaps, sent this affliction upon her to keep
   her humble. She died a holy death, but the evil spirit never left her
   until the very last moment.

   The blessed Catherine, while reflecting on the opposition between pure
   love and the evil spirit, was accustomed to say that man did not
   consider the difference, and did not appreciate extreme love as he
   ought, "For truly," she added, "he who does not know precious stones,
   does not value them."

   And, filled with compassion for the blindness of man, she said: "If by
   taking my blood and giving it to man to drink, I could make known to
   him this truth, I would give it all for love of him. I cannot endure
   the thought that man, created for the good that I see and know, should
   lose it

   Catherine persevered in this way for about twenty-five years,
   instructed and directed by God alone, by a wonderful, divine
   operation. Afterwards, perhaps on account of the approach of old age
   and her extreme weakness, the Lord sent a director who took charge of
   her soul and of her bodily health; a spiritual person of holy life, in
   every way fitted for such a charge, to whom God gave the light and
   grace to know his designs in regard to her. He was chosen rector of
   the hospital where she lived, he heard her confessions, said mass for
   her, and gave her communion, whenever he could do so.

   This priest, at the request of some spiritual persons who were devoted
   to the saint, wrote most of the present work, having urged and induced
   her to relate the extraordinary graces which God had conferred upon
   her, especially as this religious, by long intercourse, well
   understood the order of her life. The first time that she made her
   confession to him, she said: "Father, I know not where I am, as to my
   soul or my body. I wish to confess, but I do not see any offence that
   I have committed." And the faults that she enumerated did not seem to
   her sins of thought, word, or deed; for she was like a child who, when
   in his childishness he ignorantly does something which he is told is
   wrong, suddenly changes color, and blushes, but not because he is
   sensible to the fault.

   She sometimes said to her confessor: "I do not know how to make my
   confession, for I have not enough exterior or interior feeling to be
   able to accuse myself of having said those things on account of which
   I feel some stings of conscience. I would not fail to make my
   confession, and I do not know whom I am to accuse of my sins; I would
   accuse myself, but I cannot."

   When God was effecting anything within her that troubled her, she
   submitted it entirely to her confessor, and conferred with him; and
   he, by the divine light and grace, understood the whole, giving her
   such replies that he seemed to feel what she felt. This was a great
   consolation to her, so that she spoke to him with entire confidence,
   and could not be satisfied until she had discovered to him all she
   felt. When she was prevented from communicating to him anything that
   was upon her mind, she felt as if in burning flames, but after she had
   spoken of it to her father, she was tranquil and satisfied.

   It was a great consolation to her that he could understand her by a
   glance, when she could not speak, allaying the violence of the burning
   fire within, and strengthening her exhausted frame. The interior
   action was so intense that it became necessary to divert her mind by
   external things, and that diversion was torture to her, for it did
   violence to her heart. At one time, having been in a weak state for
   several days, she took the hand of her confessor and raised it to her
   face, and the odor of it penetrated her heart with such a fulness of
   exterior and interior sweetness that it seemed supernatural.

   The confessor asking her what was the nature of that odor, she
   answered that it was an odor that God had sent to comfort the soul and
   body in their sufferings; that it was so penetrating and sweet that it
   seemed as if it could bring the dead to life, and she added: "Since
   God grants it to me, I shall console myself with it so long as it
   pleases him." The confessor, believing that as it was given through
   him he too could perceive it, raised his own hand to smell the
   fragrance of it, but there was none there, and it was told him that
   God does not give his good things to those who seek them, but only
   bestows them in cases of necessity, and for some great spiritual
   result.

   The saint also said that she was permitted to see that this odor was a
   drop of the beatitude that the body with its senses will enjoy in
   heaven, through the humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ; by which every
   one will be satisfied eternally in body as well as soul. Her body and
   soul were strengthened and refreshed for several days by the
   impression and remembrance of this odor.

   On one occasion she said to her confessor, who was sometimes absent
   from her: "It seems to me that God has given you the care of me alone,
   and that you ought not to attend to any one else; for I have
   persevered during the twenty-five years in the spiritual life without
   the help of any creature, but now that I cannot endure such interior
   and exterior conflicts, God has sent you to me. If you know how
   terribly I suffer when you are absent, you would rather remain with me
   in my trials, than go in search of any recreation; and yet I would not
   ask you not to go."

   And indeed it appeared as if every remedy and relief that God allowed
   to her soul and body was given her by this confessor, who, at the
   moment provided her with thoughts and words, which were suited to her
   necessities, so that he was amazed at them himself, and when the
   occasion for them was past, no remembrance of them remained.

   And because this continual intercourse and close familiarity roused
   some to murmur who did not understand the necessity for them, the
   confessor withdrew and was absent for three days, to ascertain whether
   this necessity was wholly divine without any human mixture, and to
   relieve himself from every scruple; but he repented making the trial,
   on account of the severe sufferings of the saint. Moreover, he was in
   secret reproved by God for his incredulity, when he had been so long a
   witness to so many supernatural signs, one of which would have been
   sufficient to convert a Jew; and after this his scruples never
   returned.

   The saint continued for many years in this state of dependence on her
   confessor, and by the grace of God, through all his attendance upon
   her, in his fatigues and trials, his health never failed. When she
   concealed from him any interior operation, it was intimated to him by
   some divine inspiration, and he would say to her: "You have such and
   such a thing on your mind, and you wish to deny it to me, but God will
   not permit you." At these words she was greatly surprised, and
   acknowledged that they were true, and afterwards was freed from her
   sufferings. Sometimes she would say to her confessor: "What do you
   think is in my mind?" and although he knew nothing of it, yet at that
   moment words were given him, and he told her the whole.

   Treatment of the saint by her husband, and how she obtained salvation
   of his soul from God, and also that of Sister Tommasa Fiesca, her
   companion. 

   As we have mentioned before, this creature, so favored by God, was
   married at the age of sixteen to Guiliano Adorno, who, although of a
   noble family, was of a perverse and stubborn temper, and conducted his
   affairs so badly, that he was reduced to poverty; yet she was always
   obedient, and patient with his whims and eccentricities, but at the
   same time she suffered so much from him that with difficulty she
   preserved her health, and became to reduced and wasted, that she was a
   most pitiable object. She lived in a solitary house, alone, to satisfy
   him, and never went out except to attend mass, and then return as
   quickly as possible, for she would endure anything rather than give
   pain to others.

   Almighty God, seeing that this soul could be brought to great
   perfection, enabled her to support all this, without murmuring, in
   silence, and with the greatest patience. For the first few years she
   was kept in such subjection that she knew nothing of what was going on
   in the world; but, during the five following she sought to divert
   herself from the great vexations which her husband caused her, by
   associating with other ladies, and occupying herself with the affairs
   of the world as they did.

   But she was soon after called by the Lord, and left this way of life,
   never to return to it again; and, by the goodness of God, she was
   permitted to live with her husband, as a sister with a brother. Her
   husband became a member of the third order of St. Francis, and finally
   was visited by a severe illness, which he bore so impatiently that his
   wife became greatly distressed for the salvation of his soul. As his
   end approached, she withdrew into a retired apartment, and there, with
   tears and sobs, implored her sweet Love to save him, saying, "O Love,
   I beg of thee this soul: I pray thee give it to me, for thou canst do
   it." Persevering in this for the space of half an hour, an interior
   voice at length assured her that she was heard, and returning to her
   husband's chamber, she found him so calm and changed, that, by every
   word and act, he manifested his submission to the divine will.

   This miracle was made known by the blessed one herself to a spiritual
   child of hers after the death of her husband. "My son," said she,
   "Giuliano is gone: you know his eccentricity, which caused me so much
   suffering during his life, but before he passed away, my sweet Love
   assured me of his salvation." It was plain that God had caused her to
   say this, that the miracle might be made known; for, afterwards,
   Catherine seemed to regret that she had spoken on the subject, but the
   person being very prudent, made no remark and began to talk of other
   things. After her husband had passed away in holy peace, and was
   buried, her friends would say to her that she was relieved from great
   trials, and to human reason she indeed appeared to be released from
   great oppression, but she answered that she was not conscious of it,
   that all things were the same to her, and that she only cared to do
   the will of God.

   She also lost some of her brothers and sisters but so closely was she
   united with the sweet will of God, that she did not suffer any more
   than if they had not been her own kindred. And on account of this she
   could not understand why one of her companions of the same house of
   Fieschi as herself, and married as she was, should leave the world by
   degrees, for fear of turning back. After the death of her husband,
   this person became a nun in a convent of the Observantines of St.
   Dominic, called also St. Silvester; and twenty years after her
   profession, she was transferred to another convent of the same order,
   called the New Monastery, that she might reform it by introducing a
   stricter observance. She was called Sister Tommasa, was full of
   prudence and sanctity, and attained great perfection. She was superior
   of that monastery, and so burning was her zeal, that she was
   accustomed to write, compose, paint, and practice various devout
   exercises, in order to mitigate its violence. She wrote a treatise on
   the Apocalypse, and upon Dionysius the Areopagite, and other
   beautiful, devout, and edifying pieces. She painted with her own hand
   many holy countenances; the most remarkable is one of Piety,
   representing a certain very holy mystery, when the priest is
   consecrating at the altar. She wrought very delicately with her needle
   many pious subjects, among which is still seen in her first monastery,
   God the Father, surrounded by angels, with Christ and other figures of
   saints worked with great skill and dignity.

   Many things are told of this mother's devout life and exemplary
   conversation, so full of the fervor of divine love, by the nuns of her
   first and second convents, as well as by pious seculars who were her
   friends; also how happily she passed from this life praising the Lord.
   Her death took place in the year 1534, when she was more than 86 years
   of age. As we have mentioned, the blessed Catherine wondered how (when
   she was yet in the world) she could make such slow progress in
   contempt of the world; but she herself, on the other hand, said that
   Catherine, for so she called her, considered her desperate; and that
   it would be a dreadful mortification to her if she should turn back;
   Catherine was more surprised at this thought of turning back, and
   could not understand it. "If I should turn back," she said, "I should
   not only wish my eyes to be put out, but that every kind of punishment
   and insult should be inflicted on me."

   The wonderful designs of God are manifested in these two women,
   belonging to the same period, and both married; one of whom was
   converted by infused grace and at once made perfect, while the other
   arrived at perfection by virtue slowly acquired.

   How a person, hopelessly ill, was cured by the prayers of the saint. 

   A man named Marco dal Sale, who was suffering from a cancer of his
   nose, after trying every remedy that could be devised by the skill of
   physicians, and finding no relief, became almost desperately
   impatient. His wife Argentina, seeing his condition, went to the
   hospital where the holy Catherine lived, and begged her to visit her
   sick husband, and pray the Lord for him; and the saint, as if under
   obedience, complied.

   This blessed soul was so obedient, that if an ant had come to ask her
   to perform some act of mercy, she would at once have followed it.
   Catherine, having arrived at the house of the sick man, somewhat
   consoled him by a few humble and devout words. Returning afterwards to
   the hospital with Argentina, they entered a church called St. Mary of
   Grace, and there kneeling, Catherine was moved to pray for the sick
   man. Having finished her prayer, she returned with Argentina to the
   hospital, and when the latter had taken eave of her and gone home, she
   found her husband so changed, that from a demon he had almost become
   an angel, and, turning to Argentina, he exclaimed with joy and
   tenderness; "Oh! Argentina, tell me who is that holy soul whom you
   have brought here?" and Argentina answered: "It is Madonna Catherine
   Adorno, whose life is most perfect." The sick man then implored her,
   by the love of God, that she would bring her there again. The next day
   she complied with is request, and having related to St. Catherine what
   occurred, brought her home with her again.

   She knew, however, beforehand, the condition of this sick man, in the
   answer to her secret prayer; for she never made a special prayer
   except when interiorly moved to it by her Love, by which also she knew
   that it was favorably heard. When she entered the room the sick man
   saluted her, and continued weeping for some time, then said: "The
   reasons why I have asked you to come here again are, first, to thank
   you for your charity towards me, and then to ask of you one more
   favor, which I pray you not to deny me. After you left me, our Lord
   Jesus Christ himself appeared visibly to me, under the form in which
   he appeared to Magdalene in the garden, gave me his most holy
   blessing, pardoned my sins, and said that he appeared to me, because
   on Ascension Day I was to go to him; therefore, I pray you, most kind
   mother, that you may be pleased to accept Argentina as your spiritual
   daughter, retaining her always near you; and I pray you, Argentina, to
   consent to this." Both answered him joyfully that they were content.
   After Catherine had gone, the sick man sent for an Augustinian Father
   from a monastery called the Consolation, and having carefully made his
   confession and received communion, summoned a notary and his
   relatives, and arranged all his affairs, satisfying every one. They
   all thought that his sufferings had turned his head, and told him to
   be comforted, that he would soon recover and that there was no need of
   his attending to these things; but he was too wise to be influenced by
   their persuasions. The vigil of the Ascension having arrived, he sent
   again for his confessor, again made his confession, and received holy
   communion; then he received extreme unction with recommendation of the
   soul, all with great devotion, in preparation for his journey. Night
   coming on, he said to his confessor: "Return to your monastery, and
   when the time comes, I will send for you. Every one having gone, he
   was left alone with his wife, and turning towards her with the
   crucifix in his hand, said: "Argentina! I leave you this for your
   spouse, prepare to suffer, for I assure you that you will have to do
   so," which she indeed did, both mentally and from long continued
   bodily infirmity. He passed the night in exhorting and encouraging her
   to give herself entirely to God, to be willing to endure suffering,
   which is the ladder of ascent to heaven. When it was day, he said:
   "Argentina, God be with you, for the hour is come," and having uttered
   these words, he expired, and his spirit knocked at the window of his
   confessor's cell, crying: Ecce Homo; which when the confessor heard,
   he knew that Marco had passed to his Lord.

   After the burial of Marco, the blessed Catherine received Argentina as
   her spiritual daughter, according to her promise, and this by a divine
   dispensation, for, if she had not had such a spiritual child, she
   could not have lived in the state of abstraction in which she was
   often thrown by the burning fires of her sweet Love. As she loved this
   daughter of hers very much, she took her with her whenever she went
   out; and one day when they were passing the before-mentioned church,
   Our Lady of Grace, she entered, and after making her devotions, she
   said to Argentina: "This is the place where grace was obtained for
   your husband." The Lord permitted her to say this, that the miracle
   might be made known for our edification.

   Continuing an account of her extraordinary way of life, and her
   wonderful condition for some time before her death. 

   For nearly nine years before her death, the saint suffered from a
   malady not understood by physicians or by any one else. It was not a
   bodily infirmity; neither did it seem to her a spiritual operation;
   and it was very difficult on the part of those who attended her to
   know how to treat it. Medicine was of no avail, still less the support
   obtained from bodily sustenance; but at length a way was found to
   control it.

   She was greatly debilitated, so that at times she appeared to be near
   her end. For a year before her death she did not eat in a week what
   another would require for one meal, and for the last six months she
   only took a little broth, refusing everything else.

   She never omitted holy communion, except when absolutely unable to
   receive it, and in that case she suffered more from the deprivation
   than from all her infirmities: indeed, it seemed as if she could not
   live without this most holy sacrament. The vehemence of her spirit
   became at length so great that it shattered her bodily frame from head
   to foot; so that there was not a limb or nerve that was not tormented
   by her inward fires. She threw off blood and other s ubstances, so
   that it was thought that she retained nothing even of the very little
   she ate; and for the last two weeks she took nothing but the most holy
   communion. She could not sleep, her suffering was so intense, and her
   screams were dreadful.

   The burning interior and exterior flames prevented her from moving or
   being moved. Her sufferings banished from her all friends and
   spiritual persons who could offer her any relief, so that she remained
   in perfect interior and exterior solitude. And she suffered, too, in
   another way. Her humanity would sometimes crave food so extremely,
   that it would make any effort to obtain it; and when it was offered,
   the appetite was gone and she could not taste it, but remained patient
   in her hunger.

   She was so entirely abandoned to her sufferings, that she appeared as
   if transfixed to the cross, with no desire but for the blessed
   sacrament. On the other hand, she was so happy, and uttered such
   burning words of divine love, that all around her wept from emotion.
   Many persons came from a distance to see her, and speak with her, and
   recommended themselves to her, believing that they had been a creature
   more divine than human, as in truth she was. They beheld heaven in her
   soul, and purgatory in her agonized body.

   She saw the condition of the souls in purgatory in the mirror of her
   humanity and of her mind, and therefore spoke of it so clearly. She
   seemed to stand on a wall separating this life from the other, that
   she might relate in one what she saw suffered in the other.

   We are told of St. Ignatius, that after his martyrdom his heart was
   opened, and on it was found inscribed, in letters of gold, the sweet
   name of Jesus, and who can doubt that if the heart of this loving
   servant of God had been opened, some wonderful mark would have been
   found upon it. The burning flames within even changed the color of the
   flesh about her heart, and if fire was applied to her body, she did
   not feel it, so much more powerful was the interior flame. But there
   is this difference between material fire and the flames of divine
   love, that the one consumes and destroys, while the other sustains and
   strengthens.

   How the sufferings she was to endure were revealed to her in spirit;
   and how dreadful they were to her humanity.--Seeing an image of the
   woman of Samaria, she asked of God that water.--Of a difference that
   arose between the spirit and humanity, and of other wonderful things. 

   Many graces were bestowed on this soul chosen of God, and many divine
   works were accomplished in her, during the year before she passed from
   this life to the Lord. And as things which take place suddenly cause
   greater terror, God revealed to her, at a glance, the order of his
   operations, and that she must die in great suffering, and made
   manifest to her this suffering, even her death. When humanity heard
   this she became almost frantic, and it seemed as if the soul must
   leave the body, for she could not utter a word.

   When this terrible picture was removed, this holy soul uttered words
   of such ardent and inflamed love, that all present trembled at them;
   and although they were not understood by them, yet they were filled
   with wonder at beholding such an effect. While the revelation was
   taking place, the soul remained as lifeless as the body, having no
   sensibility to anything spiritual, being like one dead. She could not
   speak of this spiritual sight, neither give any idea of it, but her
   gestures and motions appeared so wonderful as to strike with awe and
   astonishment every beholder.

   Her confessor was filled with dread at these things, considering the
   strict account to be rendered to God at the hour of death, when
   nothing is excused. What he beheld, remained impressed on his mind,
   and preyed upon it for many days.

   When the spirit was occupied intently with divine Love, and heeded not
   whether humanity lived or died, so long as the soul could remain with
   God, humanity expostulated, saying: "You cannot continue in this way,
   and live. God does not design that I should yet die; and, certainly,
   you would do nothing but by the divine will. As I must live, whether
   you will or not, you must quit this burning flame, and condescend to
   bear with me, so long as it may please God; although I am sure that at
   any rate you will make me suffer enough; for every day you are gaining
   power, and becoming more intent on accomplishing your purpose, and in
   the end you will surely conquer."

   When the spirit found itself obliged to yield somewhat to humanity, if
   it had not been restrained by a divine power, it would have reduced
   that body to dust, to obtain the liberty to be entirely occupied with
   itself; and the body, on its side, would rather have endured a
   thousand deaths than suffer so much from the oppression of the spirit;
   and in its distress it would often exclaim: "Oh, wretched that I am!
   to be engaged in so frightful a conflict;" then, addressing the spirit
   it would say: "I know that you cannot endure me, because I hold you
   bound on earth, in exile, and deprived of the fruition of the
   unbounded love of God; but I cannot sustain this fire of the love of
   God, rather would I endure any other torture than one day in its
   burning flames."

   The spirit gradually consumed the human part, and reduced it to such
   exterior and interior weakness that it could no longer complain or
   make any of its former demonstrations. And the blessed one could
   sometimes only utter such words as these: Love of God, Sweetness of
   God, Purity of God. At another time she would be continually
   repeating: Charity, union, and peace; and sometimes only one word:
   God, God. At last she said nothing, for all her powers were confined
   within. On one occasion her heart was kindled by so burning a flame of
   love, that she could not endure it, and turning to a picture of the
   Samaritan woman at the well, she cried out: "O Lord, I pray thee, give
   me a drop of that water which thou givest to the Samaritan," and
   instantly a drop of that divine water was given to her, which
   refreshed her more than human tongue can describe.

   Sometimes the conflict between humanity and the spirit was so great
   that the soul found herself, as it were, suspended in the air, drawn
   up by her intense desire to reach heaven, and yet attached to earth by
   her human and inferior part. At length the superior part so far
   conquered the inferior, that the latter became more and more detached
   from earth, and although at first this seemed strange to humanity, and
   she was discontented, yet she soon began to lose all attraction for
   earth, and to enjoy these things which the spiritual part enjoyed,
   till at length the attraction of the spirit so far prevailed, that the
   two became reconciled and were satisfied with the same food, although
   the human part did not entirely forget the earth; but she was ever
   receiving such tidings from heaven that she became constantly more
   firm, more persevering, more joyful and satisfied, so as by degrees to
   attain repose. This drawing of the spiritual part towards heaven was a
   means of purification, and the higher she ascended, the more she
   became detached from all things natural, awaiting the moment when she
   would leave the body at death, as the moment when she would leave
   purgatory for heaven; for God in his grace makes the body of some
   persons their purgatory.

   This holy soul continually suffered more and more from the favors of
   divine love; sometimes for five or six days she could hardly breathe,
   so great was the vehemence of this inward fire; and every attack was
   more violent than the last, obliging her to conceal herself from all
   creatures, to avoid their observation and wonder at her extraordinary
   condition. Her body trembled like a leaf during these attacks,
   although her soul was in perfect peace; sometimes even blood would
   flow from her nose, and she was so reduced that, for several days, her
   strength would not return, and it was only restored to prepare her for
   a fresh attack.

   How the spirit deprived her of her confessor, who concealed himself
   where he could witness her peace of mind in the midst of these
   tortures.--She had visions of angels.--Of the experiments tried by
   various physicians.--Of one who had come from England.--Of further
   divine operations. 

   On the 10th of January, 1510, during one of these attacks, all need of
   her confessor vanished from her mind, and she had no more desire to
   see him, either for the support and consolation of her body or her
   soul. She kept this thought secret for many hours, but expressed the
   contrary. This thought came from the spirit, who wished to deal with
   humanity without any intervention, and believed that the confessor,
   who thought she must do and say all she wished to do and say, might
   influence her too much, knowing, as she did, that all was by the
   ordinance of God.

   When the confessor was removed, humanity was left desolate upon the
   earth, and could hardly endure herself, consuming away and yet living,
   because it was not God's time for her to die. The confessor at one
   time concealed himself to watch the operations of God in this soul.
   She locked herself into her chamber, alone; and, in her agony poured
   out her lamentations to her Lord, exclaiming: "O Lord! what dost thou
   wish me to do in this world? All my interior and exterior senses are
   lost. I find nothing in myself like other creatures, but I am like one
   dead; no creature understands me. I am alone, unknown, poor, naked,
   strange, and opposed to all the world; neither do I know what the
   world is, and therefore I can no longer dwell with creatures on the
   earth." She uttered these and many such expressions so piteously, that
   they would have melted the stones with compassion. The confessor, who
   was concealed and heard them all, was so moved that he was obliged to
   discover himself, and drawing near, spoke to her (for God had given
   him the grace), in such a manner that she remained consoled in body
   and mind for many days.

   The sufferings of this blessed soul increased in violence, and her
   attacks became more frequent, and were sometimes too agonizing for
   human eyes to behold. She seemed writhing in flames of fire, and could
   not be kept upon her bed. Sometimes these tortures would continue for
   a day and night, without ceasing, and it seemed as if every moment
   must be her last. She lost sight and speech, but by signs asked that
   extreme unction might be given her, for she believed herself dying;
   but she lived to endure great sufferings, for through all that she had
   hitherto endured, she had remained in communication with God, and
   experienced great peace and interior joy in the midst of them; but now
   it was ordered that for a season she should be deprived of this divine
   communication, and should be left naked and desolate, with nothing to
   hold her to life but the conviction that this was the will of God
   concerning her. She would sometimes exclaim in her desolation: "It is
   now nearly thirty-five years, O my Lord, since I have asked anything
   of thee for myself; but now, most earnestly do I implore thee not to
   separate thyself from me. Thou well knowest, O Lord, that I could not
   endure it."

   She said this because, from the time she was first called by God, her
   mind had always been in union with him, and at peace, and hence the
   separation appeared dreadful to her; her soul became more resigned,
   but humanity more tortured, at every fresh attack. When she was able
   to speak, her words appeared flames of divine love, and so penetrated
   the hearts of those who heard them, that they were deeply moved, and
   filled with astonishment.

   On one occasion she had four excruciating attacks in one night. So
   great was the distress of her nerves, that from her head to her feet
   there was not a spot free from suffering; she cried aloud in her
   agony, and those around her implored God to have mercy on her, but she
   could find no relief, and yet she said, during a pause: "Tongue cannot
   tell, nor imagination conceive the peace of mind that I enjoy, but as
   to the human part, all the sufferings that man could inflict are
   nothing to the pains I endure; and in these operations the spirit and
   humanity are both watching to observe the doings of God. It is not the
   spirit, but humanity that cries out in agony."

   In the intervals of this suffering, her body appeared in health, and
   free from any feverish affection. She laughed and spoke like a person
   in health, and told others that they must not be troubled on her
   account, for she was happy, but that they must strive to do right, for
   the ways of God were very strait.

   She had at this time many visions of angels, and sometimes she was
   seen laughing with them. She smiled without speaking, and, as has been
   related, she beheld the joy of the angels, who consoled her and showed
   her the preparation for her future triumph. She also beheld the
   devils, but with little fear, for she was secure in her perfect union
   with God, which drives out all fear.

   About four months before her death, after all the attempts of numerous
   physicians for her relief, another, more extraordinary, was made.
   Several medical men were summoned, who examined this suffering
   creature, investigated all the symptoms of her malady, and afterward
   came to the conclusion that it was supernatural, and no remedy of
   medical science could reach it. This she had often said herself, and
   refused to take the medicines prescribed her. But when the physicians
   persevered in their prescriptions, she took them in spirit of
   obedience, although with great pain and injury to herself, until the
   physicians themselves came to the above mentioned conclusion.

   But there arrived from England a Genoese named Boerio, who had been
   for many years physician to the king of that country. He was
   surprised, when he heard of the fame of this holy lady, that she
   should speak of her infirmity as not natural and requiring no medical
   remedy. Hardly believing this report to be true, he obtained
   permission to visit her, and reproved her for the scandal she caused
   by rejecting medical aid, even accusing her of hypocrisy. To all this
   she humbly answered: "It grieves me much to be the cause of scandal to
   any one, and if any remedy can be found for my disease, I am ready to
   make use of it." The physician, availing himself of her consent and
   obedience, applied various remedies, but at the end of twenty days,
   finding herself no better, she told him that she had submitted to his
   treatment in order to remove all scandal from his eyes, and from the
   eyes of others, but now he must leave the care of her soul to herself.
   For it was thus that the Holy Spirit (who worked and spoke through
   her) wished to confound the too great confidence of physicians in
   their science. After this Boerio held her in great reverence, calling
   her mother, and often visited her.

   Of the many visions which the saint beheld in her last days.--Of her
   acute sufferings.--How she could taste nothing but the blessed
   sacrament, and suffered in herself the pains of the passion of our
   Lord. 

   During the last days of her life, her acute sufferings still
   continuing, this blessed soul received impressions in accordance with
   the divine operations in the saint whose day was celebrated.

   On the evening of St. Lawrence's day her body appeared to her in
   flames like his, and on the following day God visited her by drawing
   her upwards, towards himself. She remained immovable for more than an
   hour, with her eyes fixed on the ceiling of her chamber. She did not
   speak, but often smiled in sign of her interior joy. On returning to
   herself she told those around, who questioned her, that the Lord had
   showed her one spark of the joys of eternal life, and that her joy was
   so great that she could not restrain her smiles, and repeated only
   these words: "Lord, do with me all that seemeth good to thee," which
   showed that the time was approaching when she was to pass from the
   fires of purgatory into that blessed life. Her sufferings were
   constantly increasing, followed by the sweetest consolation, until the
   vigil of the Assumption, when they became so great that all those
   around her believed her passing away to her Lord. When she was about
   receiving communion, she addressed many beautiful words to the holy
   sacrament, and to the persons present: words of burning love from the
   interior fire of her heart, so fervent and pious that every one wept
   with devotion.

   The following day and the succeeding night she passed in torture, and
   received extreme unction at her own request, with great elevation. The
   next day she was in a state of such spiritual joy, that it burst forth
   in her countenance, which was radiant with smiles, to the admiration
   of those who beheld it. When the vision had passed, she answered to
   their inquiries that she had seen some most beautiful countenances,
   beaming with joy, so that she could not contain her delight; but the
   impression remained with her for seven days, so that she appeared
   better. The cause was manifestly supernatural, the change from death
   to life taking place so suddenly, and then again her return
   continually to a worse condition, as she was drawing nearer to her
   end.

   An attack so severe followed this vision that she lost the use of her
   left hand and side, and a finger of the other hand. She lay speechless
   for several hours, with her eyes closed, and could not swallow, though
   the persons about her attempted to give her nourishment; but the
   divine work going on within her was to be accomplished without human
   aid.

   Her thirst was always so great that it seemed to her she could drink
   all the water of the sea, and yet she could not swallow the smallest
   drop, or take refreshment from any created thing. She would sometimes
   attempt to taste of fruit, but as soon as it touched her lips she
   rejected it.

   On the night of the vigil of St. Bartholomew, she had a demoniacal
   vision, which threw her into great distress of body and mind. Being
   unable to speak, she motioned to have the sign of the cross made on
   her heart, and blessed herself; and by this it was understood that she
   was suffering from a temptation of the devil. She made a sign that a
   surplice, stole, and holy water should be brought her; this being
   done, in half an hour she was relieved. Oh! how wretched are those
   sinners who are carelessly awaiting this terrible presence, and a
   torment as terrible, it being so dreadful where there is no sin!

   About the 25th of August, some liquid was offered her, which she took
   in obedience, but it caused her to scream from the distress it gave
   her. She afterwards fell into a state of great weakness, and asked to
   have the windows opened that she might see the sky. As night came on,
   she had a great many candles lighted, and then, as well as she could,
   she sang the Veni Creator Spiritus. When it was finished, she lay with
   her eyes upturned towards heaven, making signs, which led those about
   her to believe that she saw wonderful things.

   Her countenance was radiant with joy, and she seemed just about to
   breathe her last; but recovering herself, she repeated again and
   again: "Let us go;" adding, "no more earth, no more earth." When
   questioned as to what she had seen, she answered that she could not
   describe those things, but they were very pleasant.

   On the 27th of the same month, she seemed as if left without any life
   of her own, and resting with her spirit alone in God. She dismissed
   every one from her apartment, saying: "Let no one enter this room
   except those who are absolutely needed." She held no more conversation
   with creatures, except so far as necessity required, and when she had
   need of any service, she said only, "Do this in charity." This was
   contrary to her usual habit, for she was accustomed to speak always
   with entire confidence and frankness to every one; and always
   expressed great gratitude for any service done her. But at this time
   she could not look upon any service as done to herself, but only for
   the love of God. This state she continued in for two days.

   On the 28th of August, the feast of St. Augustine, her sufferings were
   very great, and for some months before her death, she appeared to
   suffer much more on feast days, especially on those of our Lady, and
   of the apostles and martyrs. Often she cried aloud in her agony; but
   her silent sufferings were the greatest, when her tongue and lips were
   so parched with the burning fire within that she could not move them
   or speak. At such times if any one touched a hair of her head, or even
   the edge of the bed or the bed clothes, she would scream as if she had
   been wounded.

   When she was unable to swallow the smallest morsel of food, or a drop
   of liquid, she could always receive holy communion; and sometimes when
   her confessor found her in such a state that he feared to give it to
   her, she would make a sign, with a joyful countenance, that she was
   not afraid, and often, on receiving her face was glowing and radiant
   with joy, like a seraph.

   Sometimes she extended her arms as if stretched on the cross, and it
   seemed as if the stigmata were interiorly impressed on her, although
   they did not appear outwardly. On one occasion fresh water was brought
   her to cool her hands, and after bathing the palms, it became boiling
   hot, so as to heat even the stand of the cup, which had a very long
   stem. She also suffered greatly at this time in her feet.

   As the burning fire within increased, her thoughts and imagination
   were filled with different sins, which she had never before thought of
   these, however, did not cause her any compunction but the remembrance
   of them gave her great pain. Her attendants, seeing her extreme
   weakness, and that she had not taken food for so long a time, on the
   10th of the month of September assembled ten physicians, in order to
   ascertain if medical science could invent any remedy for her
   sufferings. After the most careful investigation of her case, they
   decided that her condition was produced wholly by supernatural causes,
   and was beyond the reach of medical skill, for all her bodily organs
   were in good order and showed no sign of infirmity; and they took
   their leave, lost in wonder and recommending themselves to her
   prayers.

   On the 12th, she again received holy communion, but took no food; she
   also made a will naming the place in which she wished to be buried;
   then she lay alternately like one dead, motionless and speechless, or
   groaning with the internal flames that were consuming her and which
   raged so fiercely that black blood flowed from her mouth. Her body was
   covered with black stripes. After these attacks she became more and
   more exhausted, and on one occasion, having her eyes raised to the
   ceiling and fixed, she made so many signs to those around that they
   inquired of her what she saw, and she answered, "Drive away that
   beast;" but they could understand nothing more.

   In what manner, and at what time, she passed from this life to the
   Lord.--Many persons saw that blessed soul, under different forms, and
   in different ways, unite itself with God.--What happened to her
   confessor when he was celebrating the Mass of the Martyrs. 

   At length, on the 14th of September she had so violent a bleeding that
   her body seemed deprived of every drop of moisture. All the blood
   remaining within had been dried up by the fire that was consuming her.
   Her pulse was hardly perceptible, but her mind was clear. During the
   night she talked freely, and received communion as usual, continuing
   in the same state until seven o'clock on the following evening.

   On Saturday night, as the morning of Sunday was approaching, she was
   asked if she wished to receive communion, to which she answered, "Not
   yet," when she found that it was not the usual hour. Then, raising the
   finger of her right hand to heaven, she wished, it would seem, to show
   that she was going to make her communion in heaven, there to unite
   herself wholly with her Love, and triumph with him forever; and, as
   hitherto she had been separated from all earthly things, seeing that
   her hour had now come, she knew that she should need no more
   communions on earth; and at that moment this blessed soul peacefully
   and gently expired, saying, "Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my
   spirit," and took flight to her sweet and long-desired Love.

   After her death that yellow tint which before was only seen about the
   region of the heart, diffused itself over her whole body, which
   signified that the divine fire had gradually consumed her whole
   humanity, which was preserved alive in the flesh until every, even the
   last particle was consumed; and then, free from every pain, she went
   forth from this purgatory, beatified, to take her place, as we must
   believe, in the choir of the Seraphim. For so purified was she by the
   divine fire in this life, it would seem that the Lord must have
   exalted her to such a glorious elevation.

   This, her most happy transit, took place in the year 1510, on Saturday
   night, December 14th, as the hour of Sunday was approaching when she
   usually received communion. Among the persons present was one of her
   spiritual daughters, who saw the soul depart swiftly, and fly to God,
   without hindrance; and this sight gave her great consolation, and so
   much light, that she addressed those about her in words of burning
   love, exclaiming: "Oh! how narrow is the way by which we must pass, to
   arrive, without hindrance, at our home."

   Another spiritual daughter of the saint, who, by divine permission,
   was tormented by an evil spirit, suffered dreadfully at that hour, and
   the spirit being forced to declare the cause, said that he had seen
   that soul unite herself with God.

   Her faithful physician was asleep, and awoke as she departed, hearing
   a voice saying to him, "Rest in God, for I am now going to Paradise."
   At these words he called his wife, and told her that the Lady
   Catherine had died just at that moment, and it was found to be so.

   Another person, who was praying, saw at the same hour Catherine
   ascending to heaven on a white cloud, and being very spiritual and
   devout, he experienced such joy and consolation at the sight, that he
   was like one beside himself, and although at a distance, he was as
   certain of her death and glory as if he had been present.

   A holy, religious lady also saw her in her sleep, clothed in white,
   with a girdle about her waist. She told her companion that she had
   seen the soul of the blessed Catherine going to heaven, and in the
   morning, to her great joy, she found that it was so.

   Another religious was at that hour rapt in spirit, and saw Catherine
   so beautiful, joyful, and content, that she believed herself in
   Paradise. She called her by her name, and told her many things which
   prepared her to suffer for the love of God, and determined her to
   change her life, which she did; and she was after heard to speak of
   the comfort she received from the memory of that vision.

   It would be a long history to relate all the other persons who had the
   same vision, in various places, and under various circumstances. Her
   confessor had no notice of her death, on that night, nor the
   following: but the next day but one, happening to celebrate the mass
   for many martyrs, and not thinking, at the time, of that blessed soul,
   he had such a clear vision of her martyrdom, that he knew every word
   he uttered was appropriate to her sufferings; and his heart was so
   wounded with compassion and devotion, that he burst into tears, and
   was hardly able to continue the mass; but in the midst of his weeping
   he experienced great interior joy and satisfaction at the divine
   disposal and her repose.

   All present at that mass--and they were friends of the blessed
   Catherine--could not restrain their weeping, so that the confessor
   himself was overwhelmed with astonishment, and could, with difficulty,
   finish the service. After it was concluded, he retired, and indulged
   his tears to relieve the oppression of his heart. So clearly was the
   great suffering of that chosen soul revealed to his mind, that all he
   had seen of it with his bodily eyes and known by long experience,
   seemed as nothing to the reality, and if God had not helped him, he
   would have died of grief.

   Of her burial, and how the body was preserved in the midst of great
   moisture and putrefaction.--How many prayers were granted by her
   intercession, and a person restored to health.--Of the order she gave
   to have her heart opened, which was not done. 

   The body of this saint was interred in the principal hospital of the
   city of Genoa, in which, for many years, she had served the sick. It
   was first put in a beautiful wooden case, near the wall under which it
   was not noticed that an aqueduct passed. It remained there nearly a
   year, and when it was disinterred, the tow laid around the body was
   filled and covered with large worms that had been generated by the
   moisture produced by the water; but not one had touched the holy body,
   which was entire from head to foot, and the flesh dried rather than
   consumed.

   Crowds of people flocked to see this wonderful sight, so that it was
   found necessary to expose it for eight days. But as some depredations
   had been committed on it, it was enclosed in a chapel where it might
   be seen and not touched. It caused great surprise when the cloths that
   wrapped it, and even the wood of the coffin, were seen to be destroyed
   and spoiled, and the body uncorrupted and without a stain.

   Many were graciously heard who recommended themselves to her, and
   among others a friend of hers, who was sick, obtained the favor of
   restoration to health. Her infirmity confined her to her bed, but
   having had a vision of the happy state of the blessed soul, she
   directed that she should be carried into the church and placed near
   the body. On applying the cloths that were about it to the place where
   her pains were most severe, and commending herself to the saint, she
   was instantly cured, and returned to her house alone, without any
   assistance. For this great favor received, she caused a mass of our
   Lady to be offered at each anniversary, and another on the Festival of
   the Assumption, and left provision at her death that these masses
   should be perpetual.

   At present the blessed Catherine is held in great devotion, in
   consideration of her holy life, illuminated with such peculiar graces.
   She directed, some months before her death, that her body should be
   opened and the heart examined, to see if it were not wholly consumed
   by love, yet her friends did not venture to do it.

   That holy body was placed in a marble sepulcher, erected in the church
   of the hospital; but it was afterwards removed to a less conspicuous
   tomb, on account of the inconvenience caused by the number of persons
   coming to visit it.

   It remains for us to pray our most merciful Lord, that by the
   intercession of this blessed soul, he may bestow on us the abundance
   of his love, that we may all advance from virtue to virtue, and at
   length be united in eternal bliss with Him who liveth and reigneth
   eternally.
     _________________________________________________________________

SPIRITUAL DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE SOUL, THE BODY, SELF-LOVE, THE SPIRIT, HUMANITY,
AND THE LORD GOD

   In the first part St. Catherine relates in what manner she was
   captivated by worldly allurements, and how, from this state, she was
   entirely converted to God, and devoted herself to austere works of
   penance. 

   In the second, she describes the sublime perfection of the spiritual
   life in which she is engaged. 

   In the third, she discourses of the divine love and of its wonderful
   effects, and how she has experienced them all in herself. 

   The soul and the body propose to travel in company, and to take
   self-love for a third party. 

   I saw, said the saint, a Soul and a Body conversing with one another;
   and first, the Soul said: My Body, God has created me to love, and to
   enjoy myself; I wish, therefore, to go where I can best accomplish
   this design, and to have you accompany me in a friendly way, since it
   will be to your advantage also. We will go through the world; if I
   find anything which pleases me, I will enjoy it; you can do the same
   when you find anything which pleases you; and let him do better that
   can.

   The Body answered: Though I may be obliged to do whatever pleases you,
   yet I see that you cannot accomplish all that you wish without me.
   Therefore, if we are to set forth together let us come to a perfect
   understanding before we start, in order that we may not fall out by
   the way. For my own part, I agree to your proposal, but let each of us
   be satisfied with the success of the other when he meets with anything
   that pleases him, for such forbearance, will keep us in peace. I
   advise this beforehand, because I do not wish that you should deceive
   me, and say whenever I find something that I like: "I do not wish you
   to linger here, for I am going elsewhere to attend to my own
   concerns," and thus I might find myself obliged to abandon my own
   plans in order to follow yours. In that case, I assure you I should
   die, and our design would be frustrated. To prevent this, I think it
   would be well to take with us a third companion, some just person who
   has no share in our partnership, and to whom all our differences could
   be referred.

   Soul. I am well-pleased with this proposal; but who shall this third
   person be?

   Body. Let it be Self-Love, who lives with us both; he will see that I
   have what belongs to me, and I shall enjoy with him. He will do the
   same for you, and thus, both will be satisfied, each in his own way.

   Soul. What shall we do if we find food equally gratifying to both?

   Body. Let him eat who may. If there is enough for both there will be
   no disagreement. If there is not enough, Self-Love will give to each
   his share. But since our tastes are so different, it will be most
   extraordinary if we should find food equally pleasing to both, unless
   one or the other should change; which is contrary to the nature of
   things.

   Soul. By nature I am more powerful than you, and therefore I have no
   fear of your converting me to your tastes.

   Body. But this is my home, where I have so many delightful things to
   enjoy, that although you may be more powerful than I, you could not
   possibly awaken in me the desire to be converted to yours. But I,
   being, as I have said, at home, might more easily convert you to my
   tastes, doing it from love and from a wish to please you, for you are
   seeking things which you neither see, taste, nor understand,--nor do
   you even know where your home is.

   Soul. Let us try the experiment; but, in the first place, we must make
   some agreement by which we may secure harmony. Let us take alternate
   weeks. When it is my turn you must do whatever is pleasing to me; and,
   in like manner, when yours comes, I will do whatever you wish, always
   excepting, so long as I live, whatever would offend our Creator. If I
   die, that is, if you induce me to offend him, I shall then be your
   servant to do your bidding, for in that case I shall be wholly
   converted to your wishes, and shall take pleasure in whatever pleases
   you. Being thus united, no one but God can ever interrupt our
   union,for it will always be protected by free-will; and both in this
   world and the next we shall receive together the reward of all the
   good and evil that we do. A like fate will be yours, if I succeed in
   conquering you.

   But here comes Self-Love. You have heard the whole. Will you be our
   third party, our judge, and the companion of our journey?

   Self-Love. I consent, and shall find it greatly to my advantage. I
   shall give each of you what belongs to him, for this will not injure
   me; and thus I shall live on equal terms with both. But if either of
   you should wrong me, and deprive me of my support, I shall immediately
   have recourse to the other, for on no account would I be deprived of
   my own subsistence.

   Body. I am not one who would ever abandon you.

   Soul. Nor would I ever do so, especially as we all agree and
   understand that, above all things, we are to avoid offending God.
   Therefore, if either of us sins, the others will check the offender.
   Now, in God's name, let us go, and I, being the most worthy, will take
   the first week.

   Body. I am contented; guide me, and do with me whatever reason
   directs. Self-Love and I yield to you.

   The Soul and the Body take their turns, in which each enjoys itself
   according to its wishes and tastes. 

   Then the Soul said within itself:

   Soul. I, who am pure and without a stain of sin, will begin by
   considering my first creation and all the other benefits I have
   received from God. I know that I was created for such blessedness, and
   of such dignity, that I can almost soar above the choirs of angels,
   and I find myself in possession of a mind all but divine; for I am
   always drawn by my pure intelligence to the meditation and
   contemplation of divine things, and filled with the constant desire to
   eat my bread with the bread of angels. I am, in truth, invisible. I
   would have, then, all my food and all my delight in things invisible,
   for to this end was I created, and here I find my rest. I have nothing
   to do but to draw down from heaven the strength which I need, and to
   put all things else beneath my feet; I will, therefore, spend this
   entire week in contemplation, and take heed of naught else. Let him
   live thus who can do so; and he who cannot must have patience.

   But I see that my companions are growing restless. I will go towards
   them. Well, my comrades, I have finished my week; do you, O Body!
   treat me in yours as you see fit. But tell me, how has it fared with
   you while I took my turn?

   Self-Love. Not well; for into your regions neither Self-Love nor
   mortal Body can enter. We have had not the slightest nourishment and
   are nearly dead; now, however, we hope to have our revenge.

   Body. Now it is my turn. Come, Soul, with me. I will show you how much
   God has done for me. Behold the heavens and the earth with all that
   adorns them; the sea with its fish, the air with its birds; and then,
   so many kingdoms, principalities, cities, provinces, as well spiritual
   as temporal: great dignities, numerous treasures; songs, sounds, and
   food of every kind for my support in never-failing supplies to the end
   of time, as well as innumerable other delights. And I can enjoy all
   these without offending God, for he created them all for me. You have
   not shown me your country as I am showing you mine. But as I cannot
   have my will unless you deign to indulge me in it, I venture to remind
   you that you are under great obligations to me, and that you must not
   think of going into that country of yours, and leaving me starving on
   the earth. You cannot do it, for I should die, and it would be your
   fault; you would offend God, and then we should all be your enemies. I
   have the advantage of being able to enjoy all these things while I
   live, and in the next life of enjoying your country also, saving
   myself, as I shall do, by your means. Remember that I am concerned in
   your salvation, for I shall be always with you; and do not believe
   that I desire anything contrary to reason, or displeasing to God. Ask
   your comrade, Self-Love, if I am not speaking the truth. I would not
   be unreasonable in my demands, and I will abide by his decision. I am
   sure that what I am seeking for you, is not only needful, but also
   agreeable to the will of God.

   How Self-Love blames both the Soul and the Body, and wishes to rule
   them himself.--The Soul complains, and the Body, adhering to
   Self-Love, demands what its needs require. 

   Self-Love. I see your motives, which seem to me very reasonable when
   you do not go beyond the bounds of charity which God prescribed when
   he said: "Love thy neighbor as thyself." But, in the first place, the
   Soul has made no account of us, so that we have been actually in peril
   of our lives; and, on the other hand, I have seen the Body making too
   great a display to the Soul, of things that are unnecessary to both.
   In short, O Soul, you must restrain your impulses, and condescend to
   the necessities of your neighbors, your Body, and myself, if we
   undertake to live with you in that country of yours I have found
   nothing for myself; it is, in good truth, the very last of all places
   in which I should choose to take up my abode. As for you, O Body, it
   is enough for you to have the necessaries of life, since superfluities
   are as injurious to you as they would be to the Soul, were she to
   yield to you. But if you give them up, each of you will be able to
   live moderately, and according to his taste; I shall find it possible
   to remain with you, and being thus united, each will enjoy, with
   discretion, the advantages belonging to the others. If you wish, O
   Soul, to avail yourself of the Body, you must give it the requisite
   support, or it will complain; if you nourish it, it will be quiet, and
   you can use it as you please. In that case, both of you will be at
   peace, and I shall be obliged to go away, for I could not live with
   you. This is my opinion.

   Soul. I am greatly displeased and dissatisfied to be obliged to
   condescend, in so many things, to the Body; and I fear that feeding
   it, under this plea of necessity, will lead to my taking part in its
   gratifications, and thus finally losing the greater for the less.
   Seeing both of you so craving, makes me fear that you will give me so
   much to do, that you will change me from spiritual into earthly; for,
   after tasting earthly things, I shall lose my relish for heavenly
   ones. I fear, too, lest the intellect should be defiled and the will
   corrupted. Help me, O my God!

   Body. It seems to me that Self-Love has settled the question, and we
   may go on joyfully in company. As far as you are concerned, O Soul, do
   not forget that God would not have created the things that he has
   created, if they were injurious to souls. The Soul was endowed with so
   much power and dignity, that she cannot be held back without her own
   consent, for her will is so much respected by God that He never forces
   it. Neither I nor others, therefore, can take anything from you but by
   your own consent. You hold the reins; give to each what he needs, and
   then let him complain who will.

   The Soul. What are these necessities of which you speak as
   indispensable? Tell me, that I may, once for all, provide for them,
   and never think of them again; the mere idea of them greatly disturbs
   me.

   Body. I must have clothes, food, drink, and sleep; and be served, and
   amused, if you wish me to be in a condition to serve you when occasion
   requires; when you desire to occupy yourself with spiritual things,
   you must not weary me, for if I am taxed too much I shall not be able
   to attend to your affairs. But if you will look after my necessities,
   you can entertain your mind with the thought that God, who has made so
   many delightful things for this mortal body, has provided much greater
   goods for you, O immortal Soul! Thus God will ever be praised, and
   each of us be satisfied in his own way. If any difference occurs
   between us, our Self-Love, who is so wise, will adjust it, and we
   shall all be able to live together in most holy peace.

   Soul. Come, then; I will provide for your necessities, since I cannot
   do otherwise; but I suspect that you have joined against me. Yet your
   words appear so reasonable that I am obliged to submit although I
   distrust you when I hear you so often refer to me, and say that you
   can do nothing without me. Perhaps, by the help of God, I shall one
   day escape your hands, and live in his service without you.

   The Soul, the Body, and Self-Love pursue their journey, during which
   the Soul cannot complete her whole week, and the Body encroaches upon
   it.--The Soul allows herself to be persuaded by Self-Love under
   pretext of the necessities of her two companions.--The Soul laments
   her condition and proposes not to take her turn again. 

   Body. Let us go straight forward on our journey, and thus traveling
   through the world in harmony, each will accomplish his own business,
   seeking, according to his condition, support, food, and pleasure.

   Soul. My turn has come again, but alas! I cannot do as I did at first.
   I find myself drawn to earth by the pressing necessities of others,
   for which I am bound to provide; and thus my time passes only
   half-improved, while I live with these my companions on the best terms
   I can. It seems to me a heavy mortification to be obliged to leave so
   great a thing as divine contemplation, in order to employ myself in
   providing food for animals; so that the difference between this week
   and the other is as great as between light and darkness.

   Body. This is my week, and I find myself almost famished through the
   fastings imposed upon me by the Soul. Yet I see that she condescends
   to my necessities, and therefore, I must take good care of myself and
   gain all the strength I can. Indeed I feel better already. In this
   way, I need not fear what the Soul may do to harm me during her week,
   especially as she is not able to keep the high stand she took at
   first, and thus I have not only my own week, but half of hers; and my
   needs, which she cannot but supply, are growing greater every day.

   Soul. O Self-Love! I see that I am robbed of my rights by
   condescending to your endless necessities, and leaving the right path
   by permitting myself to be led by you, who are so self-seeking; in the
   end, we may find ourselves all astray. Will you, then, who are the
   umpire, tell me candidly what you think?

   Self-Love. Soul, you have, without any cause, become so estranged from
   us, that you think it a great matter to condescend to the needs of
   others, especially from the height to which you had ascended. By
   degrees, however, you will become more settled; and keeping company
   with us will not appear so great a hardship to you as it now does.
   Have no doubts--God will provide. You are not to enjoy perfect
   happiness in this life, but in the next. Now take what you can get,
   and do the best you can.

   Soul. I see not how I can defend myself, since I live with you, and
   you are united against me. It does me no good to take my turn, for
   your wants are so incessant that you allow me not a day's rest, and so
   engrossing that I have no time for myself.

   And when your turn comes, you wish to have everything according to
   your own pleasure and proclaim yourselves masters. I cannot but be a
   loser in the end, and therefore, I think seriously that I will try
   this plan no longer, but will let each one provide for himself, and
   find food where he can. I shall try to bear myself toward each of you
   in the best way I am able, since I have no choice in the matter, but
   must, perforce, remain with you.

   Body and Self-Love. In our judgment this will answer very well. We can
   all live peaceably without quitting our own spheres, the more easily,
   since you, O Soul! have at length discovered your mistake.

   The Soul yields to the allurements of the Body and of Self-Love, and
   falls into the depths of sin.--Of the little satisfaction she takes in
   earthly things, and the trifles that are sufficient to content the
   Body.--Of the troubles of the Soul. 

   And thus they went traveling through the world, each seeking to
   gratify his own desires, and living according to his own pleasure. The
   Soul looked after the Body, and granted it many things that it
   esteemed necessary; but, day by day, its appetites increased, incited
   by Self-Love, which bound them closely together, that they might not
   become divided. Everything appeared to them reasonable and necessary.
   They were never willing to deny themselves anything, and if they were
   not permitted to obtain every day something new, some fresh
   nourishment, they murmured, and complained that they were injured.
   Thus was the Soul finally led into an unfathomable sea of earthly love
   and delight, which effected in her so great a transformation, that she
   could no longer think or speak of anything, except according to the
   will of the Body and Self-Love. If she wished to turn to her own
   concerns, overpowered by her disorderly appetites, she dared not
   speak; and, in her discontent, she thus reflected within herself:

   "If they should lead me as far into their own country as I led them
   into mine, during the first week, who will rescue me from their power?
   Without doubt, they will, under the plea of necessity, do with me
   whatever they see fit."

   Now this Soul, which still craved some support for her life, in order
   not to fall into despondency, as she had been created for love and
   happiness, trimmed her sail to the wind, although it was contrary, and
   finding herself no longer able to live in her own region, she still
   sustained herself, as best she could, saying, with some show of truth:
   "This beauty, pleasure, goodness, grandeur, and delight, together with
   all that adorns created things, furnish one means of knowing and
   tasting those that are divine;" and when she had tasted them she
   exclaimed: "Oh, how beautiful must be celestial things!"

   And thus, still traveling with her two companions, she daily lost
   something of her natural, divine instinct, and fed on the husks for
   swine, as bestial as the body, so that, in a short time, the three
   found themselves on very good terms with one another.

   While they were journeying on, in such great love and harmony, without
   any dissension, we may imagine what became of the rights of the
   superior reason. Nothing more was said about it. All their attention
   was turned to earthly things, to temporal pleasures, delights, and
   loves; and spiritual things seemed so unpalatable to them that they
   had no desire either to speak or hear of them, lest they should
   interfere with their earthly satisfactions. Thus they continued for
   some time, until nothing remained to the soul but a little
   compunction, which she seldom noticed, although at times she did so
   when it remained her of the risk she ran of losing everything at
   death. This thought caused her great fear, but when it left her she
   returned to the same course as before. One thing alone was against
   her, and that was, that although her companions and herself were all
   agreed to satisfy their appetites as fully as possible, yet they were
   not able to do so; for the soul having a boundless capacity, all
   finite and earthly things could neither satisfy her nor give her
   peace; the more she sought, the more restless she became, because she
   wandered farther every day from God, her true rest.

   Yet earthly things so far blinded her that she believed she found
   peace here below; she strove, therefore, to keep herself continually
   occupied, in order to satisfy herself, and when she could not
   accomplish this in the manner she proposed, she became disgusted, and,
   in her interior blindness, tried something else. Thus passing from one
   thing to another, and from one hope to another, she forgot herself;
   and losing her time in these pursuits, she never obtained her wish,
   for so it was mercifully ordained by the Lord God. And certainly if
   man could find rest on earth, few souls would be saved, for they would
   become so absorbed in earthly things that they would make no effort to
   free themselves from them. The Soul, by her natural instinct, seeks
   enjoyment; and when she is blinded by the Body, she procures her
   pleasures through its means. So the Body leads her on from one thing
   to another, as they seek their food together; and though the Soul has
   an infinite capacity, and cannot, by means of the Body, find aught
   that will content her, yet she foolishly allows herself to be led by
   it, without receiving any satisfaction.

   But the more the Body assimilates the Soul to itself, the more ways
   has it to enjoy and please itself with earthly things, since all its
   satisfaction comes through the condescension of the Soul; so that, if
   the Soul did not give her consent, the Body would have neither
   enjoyment nor delight. But as the Body is so closely united with the
   Soul, which cannot be contented with the things of earth, and as it
   cannot further her wishes, nor yield her the enjoyment she desires,
   therefore she is famished. And this is because the tastes of the Body
   are capable of satisfaction; for when its wants, of whatever nature,
   are appeased, the appetite is lost, and it can enjoy no more. It is
   true that it does not lose the desire to seek new pleasures in
   accordance with its natural tastes, but it can find nothing to satisfy
   it entirely; not, indeed, that the Soul will not condescend, nor that
   the health of the Body will not permit, but only because it has gone
   to the limit of its capacity, and hence both Soul and Body are ill at
   ease.

   The Soul is disquieted because she finds herself in this vessel of the
   Body, so narrow and requiring so little to replenish it, although
   whenever it is empty, all created things seem insufficient to fill it.
   She is obliged to remain in it, although she is well nigh famished
   while urged on by her natural instinct for enjoyment. This happens by
   reason of the sympathy of the Soul when she wishes to procure
   enjoyment by means of the Body, for when she finds that the Body is
   satisfied with a trifle, and that it cannot further indulge itself
   because its desires are blunted, she is distressed by this, and also,
   because she cannot herself enjoy what still remains to be enjoyed. The
   more she gratifies her tastes, the less enjoyment she obtains from
   them; for it is in vain that man strives to regain his lost appetites,
   since he endangers his life thereby. Therefore the Soul addresses
   Self-Love, in the following words:

   How the Soul discourses further with Self-Love, proposing a new mode
   of action.--Of the nature of Self-Love.--Of the little required to
   satisfy the desires of the Body.--How the Soul falls into misery and
   despair. 

   Soul. O Self-Love! do you not see how we molest each other, and how
   ill-fed we are? You have made me yield to your appetites, and now I am
   wretched indeed. I no longer pasture in heaven, and you starve me to
   death on earth: how is it with you?

   Self-Love. I see that you are both dissatisfied, and thus far, not
   without reason. Let us go on, however, and perhaps we shall, by and
   by, find upon the road some good that may suit us all. I see plainly
   that this Body can consume but little, so that I, too, am not supplied
   with all the nourishment I am capable of taking. In one instant I
   devour what would satisfy the Body for a year, and how must it be then
   with you, whose capacity so far exceeds mine? This we will go: let us
   go in search of food better suited to us than we have hitherto found,
   give the Body as much of it as it requires (which is a trifle when
   compared to our needs), and then let it complain as much as it likes.

   Soul. On what do you nourish yourself, and what can we find that will
   satisfy us both, and yet sustain the Body?

   Self-Love. I have a great appetite; I feed both on earthly and on
   spiritual food; but do not take me to that place where you went the
   first week, but rather to any other spot. When I travel with any one
   and find enough to live upon, I seldom abandon my company; I collect
   such supplies that my followers are never in want, and I make them all
   rich.

   Soul. I know that there is not on earth food suited to us both, from
   the fact that there is not enough to satisfy us. We have wandered so
   far from heaven (where there is food in plenty) that I know and can
   find no way that will lead us thither again; and I see that God closed
   the door of this grace at the moment when we deliberated whether we
   should feed according to the tastes of his world, and has left us to
   gratify our appetites. Now that we are perplexed and discouraged about
   our pasturage, we wish to return to him for our own benefit, and not
   through true and pure charity, which the Lord requires from us, and by
   which he always works in us. When I think of all I have done for you,
   and of all that I have justly lost, I see that I deserve to be
   abhorred by God, by you, by the world, and by hell. I am almost in
   despair through shame at finding myself led by you into the midst of
   earthly things, in which I believed I could find a supply for our
   joint necessities, while we remained together in this world. But,
   after trying everything, I find that not one of us could be contented
   or satisfied even if we had all we asked on earth. I have witnessed
   and proved all your appetites, and I have found that your way of
   quieting them greatly inflamed them; and yet, that they are so quickly
   satiated that after even a little gratification they were disordered,
   although there had been such an intense craving for that little. Yet,
   though blunted, they were never appeased. They were always finding
   themselves in the same condition. When they seemed satisfied I was
   famishing; and when I wished to return to my own country, to gratify
   my instincts, I found no cooperation as at first, for I had withdrawn
   from my first path, which was straight, clear, and open for all
   spiritual operations. Having consented to this, by reason of certain
   disorders of the Body, under the plea of supposed necessity, at once
   superfluity followed in the train of necessity, and shortly I was
   buried in sin; and in this snare I lost grace, became blind and dull;
   and from spiritual, wholly earthly. Now, alas! I am in such a
   condition that I can only move earthward, whereby I am drawn into
   every evil, like one who has wandered from his home. I leave myself to
   be led by you, O Body and Self-Love, wherever it pleases you, and you
   have carried me so far that I cannot even resist your appetites.

   You have, by degrees, so changed me, or I might rather say, perverted
   me, that I feed on the same food as yourselves; and we are so united
   and agree so well, that I blindly fall in with all your desires, and
   have, thus, from a spiritual soul become almost an earthly body. And
   you, Self-Love, are so closely bound to us, and keep us so closely
   bound to each other, that I, poor creature, am like one chained and
   stifled, and, as it were, dead to spiritual things. As if deprived of
   interior light and taste, I go on, gazing at and tasting things
   earthly and corporeal, and there is no good thing remaining to me,
   except a certain secret remorse which leaves me but little rest. Yet I
   continue neglecting myself, and enjoying, as I may, these earthly
   things which I feed upon, and wasting my time, while daily I bring
   myself into greater slavery; and the farther I withdraw from God, the
   more dissatisfied am I with my estrangement from my natural good,
   which is God himself.

   Thus did this unhappy Soul often bewail her wretchedness, while yet
   she was ignorant of its cause. This was the divine instinct which she
   naturally possessed; for the all-merciful God never abandons one of
   his creatures while it remains in this life, but often visits it with
   some inspiration, by which man finds himself aided when he listens to
   it, although, if he resists it, he often becomes worse, by reason of
   his ungrateful neglect of preventing grace.

   This unhappy Soul soon became so burdened with sins and ingratitude,
   with no visible remedy, that she lost all hope of being delivered from
   them, and went so far as not only to take pleasure in sin, but even to
   boast of it. The greater were the graces she had received, so much the
   greater was her blindness of heart and her despair of doing right; so
   that it was impossible that, by any human means, she should ever
   obtain relief. Nothing remained but that God should rescue her by his
   infinite grace and goodness; for she had now fallen so low that all
   her desires, affections, interests, and delights, were fixed upon
   earthly objects. Everything else she hated and never mentioned, for
   she was so perverted that what once seemed sweet to her, now appeared
   very bitter, through the change of her taste from heavenly to earthly.

   Of the light which God gave to the Soul to discover all her faults,
   and the state into which she had sunk.--Of her submission, confidence,
   and conversion. 

   After God in his goodness had left the Soul to wander for awhile among
   the things of this world until she became disgusted (for she soon
   found by experience that such things could never satisfy her; but
   that, on the contrary, they became daily more distasteful), this
   merciful God sent a light which penetrated her intellect, and showed
   her all the errors and dangers into which she had fallen, and from
   which God alone could deliver her. When she saw just where she was,
   and what path she was pursuing, and that the death of the body was on
   one side, and the death of the soul on the other, and found herself in
   the midst of so many enemies whom she allowed to lead her like a beast
   to the shambles, and even seemed to go joyfully on her way, terror
   seized upon her and with a deep and piteous sigh she turned to God,
   and cried to him as best she could.

   Soul. O wretched creature that I am! who will deliver me from all this
   misery? God alone is able: Domine, fac ut videam lumen, that I may
   escape these snares.

   No sooner had she directed her thoughts to God, and implored his help,
   without which she saw she had no power to move, but could only go from
   bad to worse, than suddenly her confidence in him became firm, and she
   left him to do his own will in what manner, and so far as it pleased
   him; and she added:

   Soul. From henceforth all that befalls me I will receive as from the
   benign hand of God, excepting my sins, for they are all my own;
   committing them is always contrary to the divine will, and therefore
   they are our own property; nothing is ours but voluntary sin.

   This firm resolution, made by the Soul before God, was secret and in
   her own spirit alone, without any outward demonstration. Now, when God
   sees that man distrusts himself, and places his whole confidence in
   Providence, he immediately stretches forth his holy hand to help him.
   He stands ever at our side, he knocks, and, if we open to him, he
   enters; he drives forth our enemies one after another, and restores to
   the Soul its baptismal robe of innocence; and all this God does in
   different modes and ways, operating according to the state in which he
   finds his creature. For the present we will speak of his dealings with
   Self-Love, and how he purifies the soul from it.

   Of many illuminations received by the Soul, and of the pure love of
   God.--Of conscience, and the remorse which God awakens in it. 

   When God wills to purify a soul from self-love, he first sends her his
   divine light, that by it she may discern a spark of that pure love
   wherewith he loves her, and how much he has done and still does by
   means of this love; for he has need of us in nothing, not even the
   least thing. We are his enemies, not only by our nature, which is
   inclined to evil, but by our manifold offences, which we are ever
   ready to repeat.

   He also discovers to her that our sins can never excite his anger so
   far that he ceases to do us good while we are in this world; rather
   does it seem that the more our sins remove us from him, so much the
   more does he seek to draw us toward himself by many incentives and
   inspirations, in order that his continued love and his benefits may
   keep us still in his love. The better to effect this, he uses
   countless ways and means, so that every soul, beholding what he has
   done for her, may exclaim, full of admiration: "What am I that God
   seems truly to have no care for any one but me?"

   And, among other things, he discovers to her that pure love with which
   he created us, and how he requires nothing of us but that we should
   love him with that same love wherewith he has loved us, and that we
   should remain ever with him, expecting no return except that he may
   unite himself to us.

   And he shows her how this love was chiefly proved in the pure angelic
   creation, and afterwards in that of our father Adam, created in his
   purity and sincerity by that divine love of his, wherewith God desired
   to be loved and obeyed; for if he had not required submission in
   something from Adam and his posterity, such was the excellence in
   which they were created that each one could have believed himself a
   god, by reason of the rare gifts bestowed on both the body and the
   soul, and of the dominion given him over all created things; but God
   placed him under a slight restraint only, in order that he might ever
   know his Maker, and render him obedience.

   God, moreover, made known to this Soul that he had created man for the
   highest good, namely, that with soul and body he might enter into his
   heavenly home.

   He also showed her how great an evil is sin, into which she had
   herself fallen, and for which there was no remedy but another
   manifestation of his love, which he was obliged to make in her behalf.
   And he further instructed her in that ardent love for us of which our
   Lord Jesus Christ gave such proof on the earth, from the Incarnation
   even unto the Ascension, and all to save us from eternal damnation.

   All this did God, by his most pure act, reveal in an instant to the
   Soul.

   She then saw the liberty in which he had created her, not subjecting
   her to any creature, but to her Creator alone; for he had given her
   free-will, over which, while she remains in this world, nothing on
   earth or in heaven has any power.

   He allowed her to see the great patience with which he had waited for
   her, and borne with so many of her sins, in which, if she had died,
   she would have been lost forever.

   He reminded her how often she had been in danger of death; and how,
   through pure love alone, he had rescued her, that she might have time
   to know her error and escape eternal damnation.

   He also reminded her of the many inspirations he had given her to save
   her from sin, and although she had not only disregarded, but even gone
   contrary to his will, yet in his goodness, he did not cease to send
   them, now in one way, now in another, and so allured her free-will,
   that he had, as it were, forced her to do that which in his goodness
   he required. And this, too, he did so gently and patiently, that no
   example of human love was ever known on earth, which could compare
   with it.

   God also made known to this Soul that, by reason of the great love he
   bears him, his anger is never inflamed against man, but that he always
   loves him, and is ever seeking to unite him to himself in love; and
   that on his side this instinct never fails, so that his pure love,
   which ever burns yet never consumes, is always active on our behalf,
   and he shows himself terrible only toward sin. Moreover he hates
   nothing but sin, which alone prevents his love from doing its work in
   us; for even the devils, if it were not for the heinousness of their
   sins, would burn with divine love.

   God made plain to her, also, how he is always waiting to inflame and
   penetrate the hearts of men with burning rays of love, and how he is
   thwarted by sin. Therefore, if sin is taken away, all things are in
   peace; where sin is, there is never aught but strife.

   She saw, likewise, the love of God for man, which, however great a
   sinner he may be, is never so entirely extinguished as not to bear
   with him while life lasts; beyond that, all is hatred and never-ending
   wrath.

   She saw, too, a ray of his mercy shining into hell; for the wicked
   deserve infinite punishment for an infinite time; but the divine mercy
   has made the time only infinite, but has limited the extent of the
   punishment, and therefore a greater one might justly have been
   inflicted.

   This Soul also beheld a certain ray of love issuing from that divine
   fountain, and darting towards man with a force as if to annihilate
   him; and she saw that when it found impediments, then, if it were
   possible for God to feel pain, he would suffer the greatest of all
   grief. This ray aimed only to penetrate the soul, and it was her own
   fault if she were not penetrated by it, for the ray surrounded her on
   all sides, seeking entrance; but the soul, blinded by self-love, did
   not perceive it. And when God saw a soul self-condemned, who through
   her willfulness would not give entrance to the light, he seemed to
   say: "So great is the love which I bear to this soul, that I desire
   never to abandon her."

   This is because the Soul, deprived of divine love, becomes almost as
   malignant as the divine love is good and gracious: I say, almost, for
   God still grants it a little mercy. She heard these words, also: "So
   great is the love I bear thee, that I would never willingly see thee
   lost; gladly would I suffer for thee, if I could, but love and evil
   cannot dwell together, and therefore I must abandon thee; and as
   through me thou wouldst have become capable of all blessedness, so,
   abandoned by me, thou wilt be capable of all wickedness." So many
   operations and effects of love were shown to this Soul, that words
   fail to narrate them.

   Touched by this ray, the Soul saw and felt a certain flame of love
   proceeding from that divine source, which, for the moment, left her
   like one bereft of sense, without understanding, without speech,
   without feeling. In that pure and simple love, as God manifested it to
   her, she remained at that moment wholly absorbed, and never more did
   this sight depart from her memory; always she beheld that pure, divine
   love turned toward her.

   She was then shown how she had lived without the knowledge of this
   great love, and how great were the faults in which she saw herself,
   and what she could do to correspond to this pure love; and so humbled
   was she in her own eyes that she would have publicly proclaimed her
   sins through the whole city, and could do nothing but incessantly
   repeat these words: "O Lord! no more world, no more sin," with a cry
   of inward anguish which came from the depths of her heart.

   But all that she beheld did not prevent the other vision of that first
   love infused by the ray from doing its work within her; so that her
   mind was lost in that pure love in which she saw all things,
   especially those imperfections which were to be removed. Yet she did
   not estimate her sins according to the punishment they merited, but
   rather as committed against the great mercy of God, for she saw his
   pure love for the Soul, and it remained always in her heart,
   continually drawing her towards God, from whom it descended. This love
   so melted her that all her actions were done with that purity which
   now dwelt in her; and she continued so united with that ray, that
   nothing inferior to God could come between that light and the soul,
   either as to the will or its effects.

   The Soul speaks to Self-Love and the Body of the truth she had seen,
   and tells them that she should be lost if she followed them.--She
   warns them of her purpose to do to them what they had designed to do
   to her, namely, to subject them to herself.--Of the disgust they felt
   at this. 

   After the Soul had seen the many things so skillfully, purely, and
   carefully wrought in her by love she paused, and said to the Body and
   Self-Love:

   Soul. My brothers, I have come to know that God is about to do a work
   of love on my behalf and therefore I shall take no more heed of you,
   your needs, or your words, for I surely know that if I heed you I
   shall perish, although I would never have believed it, if I had not
   experienced it. Under the appearance of good and necessity, you have
   wellnigh led me to the death of sin, and have done all you could to
   bring me to perdition. Now I intend to do to you what you have wished
   to do to me, and I shall hold you in no more respect than if you were
   my deadly enemies. Never expect to be on good terms with me
   again,--give up all hopes of it as if you were among the lost. I shall
   strive to return to that path which I first entered, and from which
   you caused me to swerve by your deceits. I hope, however, through the
   divine light, that you will deceive me no more, and in the meanwhile I
   shall do all things in such a manner, that the necessities of each
   will be satisfied. If you have led me to do what I ought not, in order
   to satisfy your appetites, I will lead you to what you do not desire,
   in order to satisfy the spirit. I shall not spare you, even if you are
   worn out, even as you spared me not when I was so enslaved by you,
   that you did with me according to your pleasure. I hope to bring you
   into such subjection to myself as to change your natures.

   The Body and Self-Love were greatly displeased when they found that
   the Soul had received so much light that they could no longer deceive
   her.

   Body and Self-Love. We are subject to you, O Soul! let justice be
   done, and be the rest according to your pleasure. If we cannot subsist
   in any other way, we can live by violence; that is, you will oppose us
   as much as you can, and we will do all we can to injure you, and in
   the end each will be rewarded according to his deserts.

   Soul. I will say one thing for your consolation: for a time you will
   be greatly dissatisfied, but when I have deprived you of your
   superfluities (which will distress you very much), you will be
   satisfied with all I have said and done, and you will participate
   forever in my welfare; dispose yourselves, therefore, to patience, for
   in the end we shall all enter into the divine peace. At present I will
   supply your necessities only, but afterwards you will have everything
   you desire. I will lead you to a joy so great and so secure, that you
   will wish for nothing more even in this life. Hitherto you have had
   nothing whatever in which you could take any satisfaction, and now,
   having tried all things, I hope to bring you to a place of the
   greatest happiness, which will have no end. It will begin, and go on
   increasing, until at length there will be such peace in the soul that
   the body too will feel it, and it will be enough to mitigate the
   suffering not alone of one, but of a thousand hells. Before this can
   be attained, much remains to be done, but (with light and help from
   God), we shall come out safely on every side; let this suffice for
   your encouragement. Henceforth I shall not speak, but act.

   Body. You appear so terrible to me, and have made so deliberate an
   attack on me, that I fear you will go to some excess, to the injury of
   us all. I wish, therefore, to recall some things to your remembrance,
   and discourse with you concerning them, and then I will leave you to
   act your own pleasure. I would remind you that after the love of God,
   comes the love of the neighbor, which begins with one's own body and
   its concerns, and you are bound to preserve it not only in life but in
   health. If you fail to do so, you cannot succeed in your designs. I am
   necessary to your existence, for when I am dead, you will have no
   means of adding to your glory, nor time to purify yourself from all
   your imperfections, and purgatory must do this for you. That kind of
   penance you will find very different from bearing with a body in this
   world. As to health, when the body is sound, the powers of the soul
   and the bodily senses are in a better state to receive divine light
   and inspiration, even through the sense of taste, which, in the soul's
   esteem, passes for a superfluity. Now, if I am infirm, these things
   and many others that I could name would fail you, even as time fails
   me to enumerate them. I have said to you what seems to me most
   important both for your interest and mine that each may have his due,
   and both reach the port of salvation, without reproach in heaven or on
   earth.

   Soul. I am made aware of all that is needful to me, interiorly by the
   divine light, and exteriorly by your reasons, and many more that might
   be thought of. But, henceforth, let me hear no more reasoning, or
   external persuasions, for I wish to give my attention to superior
   considerations, which are of such a sort that they can do injustice to
   no one, but will rather give to each all that he needs, so that none
   can complain, except of his own imperfections. Whoever complains,
   shows that he is not yet well-ordered, and that his appetites are not
   in subjection to reason. Leave all this to me, O Body, and I will make
   you change your opinion. You shall live in such content that you could
   never believe it, did you not experience it.

   I was once mistress, when I first turned my thoughts to spiritual
   things; but afterwards I was deluded into making myself your equal,
   and we made with Self-Love a compact to do good, but only in such a
   manner that one should not take advantage of the other; by degrees,
   however, you so contrived that I became completely enslaved, and could
   do nothing but what was pleasing to you. Now, I am determined to be
   mistress again, with this understanding, that if you are willing to
   become my servant, I shall be contented, and you shall want for
   nothing that a servant needs. But if you will not be my servant, I
   shall compel you to become my slave, and so completely my slave, that
   you will be willing to serve me for love, and thus will all our
   opposition end, for in every way I will be served, and will be
   mistress.

   Of the view which the Soul has of the goodness and providence of
   God.--Of her faults and imperfections.--Of her esteem of herself and
   hatred of her Humanity. 

   And thus this enlightened Soul began to see all her irregularities and
   the perils, both of the spirit and the flesh, which she had unawares
   encountered, and to which she would have fallen a victim, had not the
   divine Providence interposed. She was overwhelmed with astonishment at
   the great mercy of God towards a being so deeply plunged in sin. But
   when man begins to see the goodness and providence of God, then God
   shows him also all his defects, for which he will supply the remedy,
   and the soul perceives them in an instant by that divine light, the
   light of pure love. The Soul, having these two clear views, so
   definite and precise, the one of the goodness of God in his bounty,
   granted in virtue of love, and the other of herself, plunged in sins,
   and voluntarily acting in opposition to the infinite goodness of God,
   took thought and said:

   Soul. O Lord! never more will I offend thee, nor do anything in
   opposition to thy goodness; for this thy great goodness has so
   overpowered me and drawn me so closely unto thee, that I have resolved
   never more to withdraw from thy disposal, even should it cost life
   itself.

   Then this Soul looked within, and seeing all her defects and evil
   instincts, said:

   Soul. Does it seem to you that you are prepared to present yourself
   before your Maker? How is it with you? Who will deliver you from all
   your difficulties? Now you see how wretched and vile you are, although
   you believed yourself so beautiful and good. And this happened because
   you were so blinded by Self-Love, that you believed in no other
   paradise than that of sensual delights. And now, behold how all these
   things appear in the divine presence--truly no better than the work of
   the devil!

   Then this Soul turned with a deep and bitter hatred toward Humanity,
   and said:

   Soul. I warn you, O Humanity! that if henceforth you speak to me of
   aught unseemly, you shall suffer for it. For the future, I shall treat
   you as if you were an evil spirit, for you have ever been, and ever
   will be, diabolical in your behavior, since nothing else is known to
   you. And as you now see as well as I what a terrible thing it is to
   offend God, I know not how you will ever have the courage to think or
   speak according to your own natural appetites, when you know that you
   are thereby acting contrary to his will; however, should you do so, I
   shall inflict a penance upon you that you will not speedily forget.

   When Humanity heard the Soul utter these words, and became conscious
   of the greatness of her offences, she answered not a word, but stood
   with downcast looks, like a criminal led to justice.

   How the Soul turns to God and perceives her own sinfulness, and also
   what she would have become had she continued her former
   course.--Almost in despair she bewails her offences.--Of the
   confidence with which our Lord inspires her, appearing to her spirit;
   and of the wound she receives. 

   The Soul then turned towards God, and in that clear light spoke thus:

   Soul. O Master! what has moved thee to give such light to this Soul,
   so blind and so corrupt, thy enemy, who goes astray from thee, ever
   feeding upon sensual things, and who is so unwilling to be lifted out
   of that condition, that she always shuns whatever would elevate her? I
   am stupefied when I consider myself--a creature so entirely vile!

   And while in this condition it was given her to see where she was,
   whither she was going, what would have been her end, and what she
   would have carried with her to that end had she persevered in her
   course. She saw at a glance all these things as they were, and as they
   would have been if God had not interposed. At which sight she was
   beside herself with fear and agitation, and could do nothing but weep,
   and sigh, and inwardly lament, thus bewailing her sad condition:

   Soul. Oh, wretched and most miserable! had I continued in this course,
   how many trials and sorrows should I have brought upon myself in this
   world; and in the next have found myself the enemy of God, and
   condemned eternally to hell!

   For a time this vision remained with her, and caused her such interior
   suffering that she could neither think of other things nor perform any
   cheerful action, but remained in a settled melancholy, and knew not
   what to do with herself, for she could find no rest; neither in
   heaven, which had no place for such as she, nor on earth, for she
   merited that it should swallow her up; nor did she feel that she had a
   right to appear among men, or to take heed of aught that concerned her
   comfort or discomfort. She saw that she alone had done all the evil,
   and earnestly desired that alone, and without help from any other
   creature, she might make satisfaction to the extent of her power; and
   for this reason she said:

   Soul. I see that hell is my place, but I cannot reach it except
   through death. Alas! my God! what will become of me? I know not where
   to hide myself: I wander on, lamenting, and find no place of rest, for
   I am so stained with sin that I cannot appear where thou art, and yet
   I find thee everywhere. In this condition I am insupportable to
   myself. What, then, shall I do with this foul and tattered garment in
   which I find myself clothed? Tears are useless, sighs do not help me,
   contrition is not accepted, penances are fruitless; for nothing will
   satisfy for my sins if God will not be merciful and come to my
   assistance.

   Thus the Soul remained almost in despair, powerless to make
   satisfaction, unable to have recourse to the mercy of God (for she
   found in herself nothing which could give her confidence, yet was not
   able wholly to despair), tormented within herself at the sight of the
   heavy burden which she carried, in agony of spirit at the evil she had
   done; she grieved interiorly, yet was unable to shed a tear, only
   heaving secret sighs which wellnigh consumed her life. She could
   neither speak, eat, sleep, smile, nor look up to heaven. She had
   neither spiritual nor natural feeling; nor did she know where she was,
   whether in heaven or on earth, but was like one stunned and senseless;
   gladly would she have hidden herself that she might not be found, nor
   be obliged to enter into the company of others.

   So abstracted was she, and lost in this vision of the offended God,
   that she no longer seemed a rational creature, but like a frightened
   animal. And this happened because it was given her to see the
   greatness of her sins and the ruin that they caused--a sight which,
   had she beheld it longer, would have consumed her body had it been
   adamant.

   But when God had left her to contemplate it until the impression could
   never be forgotten, he came to her assistance as we shall here relate.

   One day in her dwelling our Lord Jesus Christ appeared to her interior
   vision, bleeding from head to foot, so that the blood seemed pouring
   in a stream from his body as he passed; and in secret she heard these
   words: "Seest thou this blood? it is shed for love of thee, and in
   satisfaction for they sins." At these words she was pierced with a
   deep wound of love for him, our Lord Jesus Christ, and at the same
   time her confidence returned and banished her despair, so that she
   began to rejoice a little in our Lord.

   How God once more manifested to the Soul the love with which he had
   suffered for her.--She sees the malice of man and the pure love of
   God.--Of the offering, which she makes of herself to God, and of the
   wound she receives.--Of the five fountains of Jesus.--Of his constant
   and jealous watchfulness. 

   Another sight was shown her, greater than the first, so much greater
   that no tongue could describe, nor intellect imagine it, and it was
   this: God showed her the love with which he had suffered for love of
   her. When the Soul saw this most pure and strong love wherewith God
   loved her, she was pierced with a wound so deep, so keen, that it made
   her despise every other love and everything that could interpose
   between herself and God, except it were God himself. In the light of
   this love she saw the malignity of man the the benignity of the pure
   love of God. These two visions never again faded away from her memory,
   and the one revealed to her the other; for, beholding the infinite
   mercy of God performing such works of pure love towards man, the Soul
   would have fainted from excess of delight if any more had been
   manifested to her. Such a vision, moreover, made clear to her the
   malice of man, seeing that great love of God continually employed in
   her behalf, almost, as it were, in spite of herself; for God, looking
   not at the sins that she committed, never ceased in his mercy to do
   her good in many ways, being moved by none of her offences but rather
   with pure love repairing them, always watchful for her benefit.
   Hereupon the Soul, turning towards herself, saw how sinful she had
   been in acting in opposition to the great goodness of God. And then
   she began to see the nature of man, with all his malice, as bad almost
   as God is good. But at this sight she fell into despair of herself,
   for man seemed to her the demon, with all his malignity; and if God
   had not in part veiled the sight, both Soul and Body would have
   fainted with fear. Hence as at the former vision of the divine love
   towards man she despaired within herself, as believing it to be
   irremediable, and wishing to lose no more time in seeking for a
   remedy, she turned, as her sole confidence, to God, her Love, and said
   to him:

   Soul. Lord! I give myself to thee. I know not what I am fitted for but
   to make a hell by myself alone. O Lord! I desire to make this compact
   with thee: I will give this sinful being of mine into thy hands, for
   thou alone canst hide it in thy mercy, and so dispose of me that
   nothing of myself can any more be seen. Occupy me wholly with thy
   love, which will enlighten in me every other love and keep me wholly
   lost in thee, holding me so engrossed by thee that I shall find
   neither time nor place for self.

   Her most sweet Lord made answer that he was content, and from that
   moment all thought and memory of self was lost, so that it never more
   disturbed her peace. On the other hand, a ray of love so burning and
   penetrating was infused into her heart and wounded her so deeply that
   in an instant it bereft her of every attachment, appetite,
   delectation, and natural quality that ever did or ever could belong to
   her. She was shorn of everything, though not without her own consent,
   by virtue of her correspondence with the love revealed to her, and by
   this she was so powerfully drawn that it astonished, absorbed, and
   transformed her. She sighed and lamented far more than when she beheld
   what a sinful creature she was.

   This ray of love passed into her soul with the impression of the five
   wounds of Christ, as five fountains from which were flowing forth
   drops of blood and burning love for man. God gave her also the power
   to discern readily the nature of man; and she beheld alternately the
   one sight and then the other, so far as she could look upon them then
   the other, so far as she could look upon them and live. The sight of
   herself caused her no suffering, for her merciful God had relieved her
   of all sorrow on that account, and yet she saw herself plainly, and in
   what manner she was upheld by God. If ever God had left her to
   herself, she comprehended that she would have been ready to fall into
   all manner of wrong doing, for she saw herself as perverse as the evil
   spirit himself; but, finding herself in the hands of God, it was not
   possible in such good hands to feel any fear.

   But the sight that tortured and consumed her was of that burning,
   divine love towards man; she said that no human tongue could describe
   how inflamed she was with that glowing fire. The love that God
   manifested to her made her instinctively reject whatever was
   displeasing to him, with a jealous watchfulness against the least
   defect; and her eyes were opened not to her sins only, but to her
   slightest imperfections and unnecessary practices. She heeded not the
   world, the flesh, nor the devil. All the devils who opposed her were
   not so strong as this soul in her union with God, who is the true
   strength of those who fear, love, and serve him; and so much the more
   because she did not perceive how she could be injured by self, it
   being in the hands of God and upheld by his goodness.

   Of the instinct which led her to cast off every superfluous thing, and
   even that appear necessary.--Of her instinct for prayer and her
   mortification. 

   An instinct was given her to despise herself, and to hold everything
   under heaven in no more esteem than if for her it did not exist. This
   love gave her the further instinct to deny the body not only all
   superfluous food but also many things that appeared needful, and the
   same with regard to clothing, and all society, whether good or bad.
   She was led into solitude of mind and body, and was reduced to herself
   alone. An instinct for prayer was also given her, so that she would
   have remained for hours together, on her bare knees, to the great
   discomfort of Humanity, which, although it resented and disapproved of
   this, did not refuse to serve the Soul, and to follow wherever she
   led.

   All these instincts were called into action by God alone, for the Soul
   had no wish or aim but God, who had taken the direction, and wished to
   regulate all her desires and inclinations, and free her from all those
   that were human and worldly by giving her contrary ones. She was
   deprived of the use of fruits for which she had a natural inclination
   and an especial fondness. She ate no flesh nor anything superfluous,
   and when she needed food, that which she might eat appeared to be
   always at hand. That she might lose all relish of what she ate she was
   taught to carry always about her some dust of aloes, and when she
   found herself taking pleasure in any food or preferring one kind to
   another she secretly sprinkled it with a little of the bitter power
   before eating it. Her eyes were always cast down; she never laughed,
   and recognized no one who passed her, for she was so occupied with
   what was taking place within that her sense of exterior things was, as
   it were, dead.

   She seemed ever discontented, yet was ever most content. She tried to
   rob herself of sleep by placing rough objects in her bed, but God
   would not permit this, for however she resisted it, sleep overcame her
   against her will. When Humanity saw all this spiritual ardor, and that
   itself was no more esteemed than if it were not, and that there was no
   help for it, it was greatly dissatisfied, yet, like a thief in prison
   who dares not utter a word in his own behalf because he knows the
   crime he has committed, it feared to make the matter worse, knowing
   that Christ, the Judge, was in anger against it. One hope it could
   have (and but one was possible), as when it is raining there is hope
   that bad weather will soon be over, and with this poor hope it waited
   in patience; but the Spirit in its vehemence restrained Humanity by so
   many bonds that it could find no relief but in sleep, and became
   withered, colorless, and dry like a stick; on this account the
   following conversation took place one day between the Spirit and
   Humanity:

   Of the words that passed between the Spirit and Humanity.--Of the
   complaints made by Humanity against the fervor of the Spirit which she
   thought she could endure no longer. 

   Spirit. Tell me, Humanity, what think you of this mode of life?

   Humanity. It seems to me, Spirit, that you have entered upon this
   course so vehemently that you will hardly be able to persevere in it;
   I hope that death, or at the least, infirmity, will not fail to
   follow, and that perhaps sooner than you think; and thus you will not
   be able to attain what you are seeking in this world, but will be
   obliged to go to purgatory, where you will suffer more in a moment
   than you would here in a whole lifetime. I shall be in the grave, and
   that will be far better for me than to live in this world. You will go
   into that fire where it will be worse with you than with me. Retrace
   your steps; I have no more to say.

   Spirit. I hope that neither death nor infirmity will follow: at
   present, however, you are at the height of your misery. From this time
   forth you are purged of all bad humors; abstinence has been good for
   you; I see that your color and flesh are gone; the divine love will
   soon have consumed everything; I know that if I do not provide you
   with food you will wither away, but I will make such provision that
   everybody will be satisfied without calling on death or infirmity.

   Such light was given to the Spirit that she perceived the least thing
   that might be injurious to her, and at once removed it. Humanity did
   all that was required of it without offering any resistance, for the
   spirit was so powerful that otherwise it would have fared all the
   worse. Finding itself in this situation and wholly without comfort, it
   said within itself:

   Humanity. If I could have a little nourishment from spiritual things,
   and were able to content myself with what satisfies the Spirit, it
   would comfort me; otherwise I know not what to do, nor how to remain
   patient, thus tormented and imprisoned.

   While occupied with these thoughts it chanced that the saint found
   herself in a church, and received communion, and there came upon her a
   ray of spiritual light with such force that both Soul and Body seemed
   to have entered together into life eternal (according to those words:
   Cor meum et caro mea exultaverunt, etc.). So great was the
   illumination and the feeling of divine things which they enjoyed that
   even Humanity feasted upon them, and said:

   Now in this way I could live, but when that moment had passed, and
   this new vision had been seen by her in the light of pure love, she
   began to exclaim: Oh, Master, Master, I ask no sign from thee. I ask
   not for sensible delights, rather would I flee from them as from
   demons, for they are hindrances to pure love, which should be bare,
   lest man should with spirit and with body attach himself to it under
   the pretext of perfection. I pray thee, Lord, give not such things to
   me, they are not for me, nor for him who desires pure love in its
   simplicity.

   Humanity complains that the Spirit does not keep its promises and the
   Spirit defends itself against this charge.--Of the perils of spiritual
   delights under the semblance of good, and how they are more dangerous
   than bodily pleasures, which are evidently contrary to the Spirit.--Of
   the threats of the Spirit against its Humanity. 

   When Humanity found how hateful to the Spirit was that food upon which
   it fed and hoped always to feed, it was greatly dissatisfied and
   turned again to address her. It seemed to the body that there was no
   just cause why nourishment should be refused it, and especially now
   that it had become spiritual, for the Spirit had promised that the
   time would come when it too should be satisfied with the things that
   were according to the spirit; but, finding the contrary to be the
   case, and that the Spirit had no desire even for spiritual food and
   unwilling to regale the body with it, Humanity spoke as follows:

   Humanity. You do not keep your promises, Spirit, and it will be
   impossible for me to persevere in such austerity without some
   nourishment, either natural or spiritual.

   Spirit. You complain, and, as you think, with reason: I will,
   therefore, explain myself. You have misunderstood me. I did, indeed,
   promise that in the end you should be contented with what contents me,
   but you are looking for what will fatten, and not for what will
   satisfy; and not for what will satisfy; and because I am not pleased
   with this sensible delight, nay, even abhor it, I would have you abhor
   it also. You still have natural cravings for this pleasure, and you
   think I ought to gratify them; know that I wish to deaden and to
   regulate them that they may desire only in accordance with my
   pleasure: it is plain that you are unfirm, and I shall treat you as a
   sick person should be treated. What you desire would injure your
   health; and since you affirm that spiritual delights are given by God
   and cannot do harm, know that your intellect partakes also of
   sensuality and therefore you are not a good judge; my desire is to
   devote myself to love, pure and simple, which attaches itself to
   nothing which can excite either a natural or a spiritual sentiment or
   feeling, and I declare to you that I dread far more an attachment to a
   spiritual than to a natural delight.

   This is because the spiritual recaptures man under the pretext of
   being a good, and it is impossible without great difficulty to make
   him understand that it is not one; thus he continues to nourish
   himself on that which weans him from God. But in good truth I tell you
   that these hinges must of necessity be shunned by him who wishes to
   enjoy God as simply and purely as may be, for they are like venom to
   the pure love of God; and spiritual pleasure must be fled from as from
   the devil himself; because wherever it fastens itself it produces
   incurable infirmities which man does not perceive; but, believing that
   he is well, sees not that he is hindered from perfect good, that is,
   God himself, pure, simple, separated from all things human.

   But natural gratifications, being evidently contrary to the spirit,
   cannot be disguised under the appearance of good, and I do not fear
   them as much. The contentment and the peace that will give you are
   that which will satisfy me, and which, I am certain, will also satisfy
   you; but it is impossible that you should yet attain it, being still
   far too impure.

   I wish first to cleanse the house and then to adorn and fill it with
   good things, which will satisfy us both but nourish neither. And
   because you say that you cannot endure this, know that I must compel
   you to endure it; what cannot be done in one year can be done in ten.
   I am not sorry to combat with you, being willing to subdue you by any
   means; I wish to free myself from this constant goading at my heels,
   for otherwise it will never be well with me. You are gall and poison
   in every viand that I attempt to taste, and until I have destroyed you
   I shall never be at peace, for you seem bent upon doing your worst. I
   too shall do what is possible to free myself quickly from you; yet the
   worst that I can do to you will but redound to your benefit and
   advantage. I warn you not to get angry with me, for you can never
   obtain your desire and purpose in that way, but rather the contrary;
   console yourself with patience unmixed with hope. Conform for the
   present to my will--hereafter I may do yours.

   Humanity prays the Spirit to act justly and with equity, reminding her
   that she had been the first to sin and that the body had been merely
   the instrument.--The Spirit proves the contrary, and shows who has
   been the cause of their fall.--The Spirit demonstrates also the
   necessity of purification here, and that it is better to suffer for a
   thousand years in this world than one hour in purgatory. 

   Humanity. I am, as you see, very dissatisfied and unhappy; I can
   escape from what you wish neither by reason nor by force; yet I
   implore you to satisfy me in this matter, and then you may continue
   what you have begun and I will have what patience I can. Oh, Spirit,
   you who are bringing me to justice, I pray you deal justly with me.
   You know that I am only a body, bestial, without reason, without
   prayer, without will, and without memory; because all these are in the
   spirit, and I work as an instrument and can do nothing but what you
   will. Tell me; have you not been the first to sin, with the reason and
   with the will? Have I been more than the instrument of sin, truly
   conceived and resolved upon in the spirit? Who, then, deserves the
   punishment?

   Spirit. Your reasoning seems at the first sight to be very good; yet I
   believe I can refute it satisfactorily, as I intend to do.

   If you, Humanity, never have sinned and never can sin, as you
   maintain, God, who has made the body to accompany the Soul wherever
   she goes, to heaven as well as to hell, must be as unjust judge; for,
   whoever does neither good nor evil should have neither reward nor
   punishment; but, since it is impossible for God to be unjust, it
   follows that my reasoning is sound. I confess I was the first to
   commit sin, for, having free-will, I cannot be constrained against it,
   nor can either good or evil be done if I do not first consent. If I
   resolve upon the good, heaven and earth yield me their support, and on
   every side I am encouraged to perform it; it is not possible that I
   should be impeded, either by the devil, or by the world, or by the
   flesh.

   If I am bent upon evil, I find also support on every side, from the
   devils, the world, and myself, that is, from the flesh and its
   malignant instincts; and since God rewards all that is good and
   punishes all that is evil, it follows that all who aid in doing good
   will be rewarded, and all who aid in doing evil will be punished. You
   know that in the beginning I wished to follow my spiritual
   inclinations, and commenced with great impetuosity; but you assailed
   me with so many reasons and under the plea of such pressing necessity,
   that we were in continual conflict with each other; then Self-Love
   came as a mediator, disagreed with both, and led us so far astray that
   to please you and supply your needs I left the right path, and for
   this we shall be justly punished. It is true that if that great
   misery, mortal sin, is found among us, which God forbid, I, as the
   chief and the most noble, shall be more sorely tormented than you, but
   we shall both wish that we had never been created. Therefore it
   behooves us to purify ourselves, not alone from every stain of sin,
   but also from every smallest imperfection which we have contracted
   through our evil habits. I will tell you, moreover that God has given
   me a light so subtle and clear that of a surety, unless I fail before
   I leave you, there will remain in me no single taint of imperfection
   either of soul or body.

   Note this well: How long, think you, will this season of purification
   last? You know well that it can endure but a short time. In the
   beginning it seems terrible to you, but as it goes on you will suffer
   less, because your wicked habits will be destroyed; do not fear lest
   you should want powerful support, for know that God, by the decree of
   his goodness, never allows man to suffer beyond his strength. If we
   regarded our own proper good, it would seem better to us to suffer
   here for a little than to remain in torments forever; better to suffer
   for a thousand years every woe possible to this body in this world,
   than to remain one hour in purgatory. I have briefly made this little
   speech for your comfort.

   God pours into and diffuses throughout the soul a divine sweetness,
   whereat she complains, not desiring any proof of love.--God,
   notwithstanding, leaves her plunged in a sea of divine love.--He gives
   her, also, a vision of pure Love, and another of Self-Love and of her
   own evil inclinations. 

   When the Spirit had thus satisfied Humanity, it left her and returned
   to its first simple and pure object, steadily pursuing that intimate
   and penetrating love which was so interiorly restrained that it left
   Humanity scarcely any breath for either natural or spiritual things,
   so that she seemed like one beside herself.

   From the time that God established her in pure and simple love, he
   began to try this, his creature, with suitable temptations, mostly
   spiritual. He infused into her the great sweetness and divine
   tenderness of a most sweet love, and both Soul and Body were so
   overpowered by it that they could scarcely live. But as the eye of
   love sees all, suddenly the Soul beheld these great things, and she
   commenced to grieve and to say that she did not wish for such
   sweetness and delight in this present life, nor desire these proofs of
   love because they corrupt love itself.

   I will guard myself, she said, as far as I am able, and neither
   approach them nor provide any quiet and solitary spot where I might
   feed upon these things, for they are poison to pure love. Yet God
   pursued her and kept her in the fountain of this divine sweetness; and
   however much the soul might protest against these proofs of his love,
   she nevertheless remained plunged in them as in a sea; not always in
   one vision, but in many and diverse.

   One of these visions was that God showed her a ray of that purest love
   wherewith he himself loved the Soul; and the sight was such that if he
   had not tempered the amorous flame with a vision of Self-Love with
   which, the Soul saw herself stained, she could not have lived.

   He showed her at another time a vision of herself, that is, of her
   evil inclinations, so contrary to pure love, and thus tempered that
   devouring flame; for after beholding it she would have rather died
   than offended his love in the least, not alone by sin but by
   imperfection. The Soul, thus occupied, neither thought nor even wished
   to think of her body any more than if she had none, and in this way
   was relieved from its annoyances, and habituated it to do her will.

   Humanity laments and asks for something to do.--The Spirit consents
   and enjoins upon it that it should be obedient to all things, stopping
   at nothing for any pleasure or displeasure that it might feel
   therein.--Of the rules he wishes to observe; and of the prohibition he
   imposes upon it of forming no particular friendships. 

   When Humanity perceived that its path became daily narrower, it again
   addressed the Spirit, and said humbly and with great fear and
   reverence:

   Humanity. I find that you have deprived me of every human, external
   consolation, so that I may count myself as dead to the world; and if
   you persevere in this strictness, I see that the time will come when I
   shall desire death rather than lead any longer such a life.

   Spirit. I am willing to give you something external to do, but it will
   not be agreeable. You will even abhor it, but if you complain it will
   be the worse for you.

   Humanity. I shall be entirely satisfied if only I can have some
   employment.

   Spirit. I warn you in the outset that I wish to teach you what it is
   to be obedient, in order that you may become humble, and subject to
   every creature; and that you may be trained to this, you shall labor
   for your own support. I wish, further, that whenever and wherever you
   are called to perform works of mercy, you should go to the infirm and
   to the poor of every condition. I wish you never to refuse.

   You will do, as if by instinct, all that I command you, even to
   nursing the most loathsomely diseased persons, and whenever you are
   called to this duty, even should you be conversing with God, I wish
   you to leave all and go quickly to your work and wherever you are led;
   never regard either the person who summons you or the work you are to
   do. I wish you to have no choice; rather let the will of every other
   creature be yours; let your own be always thwarted.

   In these exercises, so terrible to you, it is necessary to employ you,
   because I wish to extinguish in you every inordinate pleasure or
   displeasure which it is possible to feel in this life. I will root out
   every imperfection, and allow you to pause for either pleasure or pain
   no more than if you were dead. This I will see for myself, for it is
   necessary to try you, and therefore I shall put you to every needful
   proof; when I give you something abhorrent to you to do, and see that
   you so feel or regard it, I shall keep you at it until you do neither.
   I shall do likewise in those things from which you might obtain any
   consolation. I will force you from them until you lose all sense of
   pleasure or pain that might proceed therefrom. And to try you in all
   possible ways, you shall always be occupied in that which is either
   pleasurable or painful.

   Moreover, you will neither form any friendship for any one, nor retain
   a special regard for your own kindred; but you will love every one
   without partiality and without affection, the poor as well as the
   rich, friends as well as kindred. I would wish you not really to know
   one from another, to make friends with no one, no matter how religious
   or spiritual, or to seek intimacy with none. Let it be enough for you
   to do your duty, as I have told you, and in this way I wish you to
   conduct yourself in your conversation with creatures on the earth.

   Of the poverty in which the Spirit compelled Humanity to live.--How
   she was obliged to visit the poor and sick.--Of the suffering she
   found among them.--Of the oppression and interior distress which she
   experienced. 

   After the Spirit had thus discoursed with Humanity, she found
   everything ordered for her in the following manner: In the first
   place, she was reduced to such poverty that she could not have lived,
   if God had not provided for her by alms.

   When the Ladies of Mercy requested her, according to their custom, to
   visit the poor for various charitable purposes, she always went with
   them among these wretched beings, many of whom were intolerable from
   the filth and vermin with which they were covered, and some of them in
   their misery and want would break forth in fearful exclamations of
   despair, so that the entrance to their dwellings seemed like the
   entrance into a sepulchre, frightful to every human being. In spite of
   this she was eager to draw near and even touch them, that she might do
   something for their bodies and their souls.

   There were some among the infirm who, beside their uncleanness and
   offensiveness, were always complaining of their attendants and loading
   them with abuse.

   She visited, too, the poor of St Lazarus, where the greatest suffering
   was to be seen, as if the Spirit sent her there in search of all sorts
   of misery and woe. She found her task far worse than she believed, and
   was assailed, as it were, on both sides, namely, on the side of
   Humanity, which loathed these miseries, and by the Spirit, which was
   so lost to every external impression as to be unable to hold converse
   with creatures.

   Humanity was so overawed by the Spirit, and thrown into such
   consternation by all these things, that she knew not what to do. For,
   on the one hand, when she was assailed by the Spirit, she would have
   done anything to escape its power, and when she afterwards beheld the
   misery of these poor creatures, she would gladly have fled from them,
   and yet could not. Everything was distressing to her, especially when
   she found that the Spirit required of her to devote herself to her
   work, without agitation or disgust, as she would take bread and put it
   into her mouth when she was hungry. And thus poor Humanity had all
   these difficult affairs on her hands, without a single remedy. No one
   could have looked upon her, in such fearful conflicts, without great
   compassion; but because these things were done for the attainment of
   liberty of spirit, everything that was required of her became easy of
   execution.

   Humanity having tried both exterior suffering and interior distress,
   the Spirit allows her to choose between them. 

   When the Spirit had given Humanity a trial of all the misery above
   described, and made her to understand all that was to be done, he thus
   addressed her.

   Spirit. Now that you have seen for yourself what before you had only
   heard of, what will you do? You have tried both ways, and one of these
   you must pursue. You may choose for yourself, however, but with the
   condition, that I will make you live with creatures in a state of
   great subjection, as long as it shall please me; in subjection so
   great that you will have no place in the world where you can turn for
   the least repose, and I shall look to it that this shall soon begin.

   Humanity. I have seen and tried the two extremes, and however great
   and terrible are the miseries I have witnessed, heard of, and endured,
   yet I would choose rather to live in the midst of them than in the
   piercing light of that divine ray. I fear both exterior suffering and
   that interior divine light which terrifies me still more; and hence I
   am in great perplexity.

   Spirit. If you choose one of these you will not have the other; but
   still I warn you that you will lose everything superfluous, in order
   that I may live, so far as possible, pure and disengaged, as I was
   created; to accomplish this, I shall disregard whatever opposes me.

   Humanity. Since you are so determined, all further talk would be a
   loss of time. I submit to all you require, and give myself up into
   your hands, as one dead yet still alive. Would that I were dead.

   The Spirit, wishing to annihilate Humanity yet further, and finding
   that to approach the filth and vermin of the poor, and to touch them,
   overcame her with disgust, said to her: "Take some of this vermin, put
   it in your mouth, and eat it, if you wish to free yourself from this
   loathing."

   When Humanity heard this, she was aghast for a moment; but she
   resolved at once to obey, and so doing was hence forward free.

   These things were so contrary to Humanity, that no effort of nature
   could make them endurable; yet when she had forced herself to comply,
   her contentment was so great that it gave her courage for the future,
   and she was able to endure the outcries and complaints of impatient
   persons, and practice every kind of self-denial.

   Thus the Spirit exercised her for about three years, all the while
   occupying her interior in such a manner that she performed all these
   acts without any interior consciousness of them, and she was made to
   persevere until she ceased to care for them.

   The Spirit brings Humanity to consent to take up her abode in a
   hospital, where she served the sick in the humblest manner, doing
   everything that she was ordered to do.--When she became accustomed to
   whatever she naturally most abhorred, she was made directress of the
   hospital, and was gifted with the prudence necessary for this
   office.--How the burning flame of love ever increased within her. 

   The Spirit now obliged Humanity to take another step, requiring great
   submission of mind and body; namely, she was directed to live in the
   hospital, with her husband, and devote herself to the service of the
   sick; and here she was under the authority of these who governed, as
   if she had been their servant, hardly daring to speak, living quietly
   in one of the apartments, and obedient to all that was imposed upon
   her. When a charge was given her she fulfilled it with alacrity,
   although she was held in no esteem by the inmates. But of all this she
   had no interior recognition, for she was wholly lifted above herself,
   and hereupon said to the Spirit:

   Humanity. If you wish me to perform these works, give me the power to
   do them. I refuse none of them, but they must of necessity be done
   with some little accidental love, or they will be ill done.

   Accordingly some interest in her work was granted her, for which and
   with which she continued it, but it was only given just at the point
   where the work in which she was engaged required it, then it was taken
   from her, together with the memory of the work; and in these
   employments, and in great poverty, the Spirit left her for many years.

   When the Spirit had disciplined Humanity, by such trials and
   humiliations, until she was able to look not only without disgust upon
   things which at first she naturally loathed, but busied herself
   unweariedly and willingly with whatever was most offensive, she was
   put to another trial, being placed as superior in charge of this
   hospital, that it might be seen if her humanity would anywhere
   discover itself, by reason of this elevation. She was tried by the
   Spirit, in this way, for many years, aided by him, however, with all
   needed hints and suggestions, without which she could not have
   fulfilled this charge. And with all these employments she remained
   recollected in that love which was secretly increasing as Humanity was
   destroyed, for just so far as she became rid of Self-Love, did she
   become possessed by pure love, which penetrated and filled her in
   proportion as she became dead to self. And thus this soul, burning
   with pure love, melted in that divine flame, and as this continually
   increased, the soul was always consuming with love; therefore she
   discharged all her duties with alacrity, never resting, that she might
   forget the flame that devoured her more and more. She never could
   speak of this to any one, but she talked of it to herself, unheard by
   others.

   Now the Spirit having thus taken possession of her, said: "I will no
   longer call her a human creature, so entirely do I behold her in God,
   and with nothing human remaining."

   Containing what God, and also the Spirit spoke to the Soul. Of the
   admirable ways by which God deprived her of all things and destroyed
   her imperfections. 

   Of a new love which God poured into her heart, by which he drew her
   Spirit to himself.--The Soul follows it, so that her powers are
   absorbed and lost in this love, and the Body, being subject to the
   Soul, becomes bewildered and changed from its natural condition. 

   After this creature had been despoiled of the world, of the flesh, of
   her possessions, habits, affections, and, in short, of everything but
   God, it was his will to deprive her of herself also, and to separate
   the Soul from the Spirit by a suffering so acute that it is difficult
   to describe it or to make it understood by one who has not experienced
   it. God infused into that heart a new love, so ardent and so powerful
   that it absorbed into itself the Soul, with all her powers, so that
   she was raised above her natural condition and so constantly occupied
   within herself that she could no more take delight in anything nor
   look toward heaven or earth.

   This Soul was unable to correspond with the body, which being thrown
   out of its natural condition, stood bewildered, not knowing where it
   was, nor what to do or say. By this new method, unknown, and as yet
   not understood by any creature, strange and new operations were then
   effected. It was as if a chain were extended, by which God, who is
   Spirit, draws to himself the spirit of man, and holds it absorbed in
   him. The soul, which cannot exist without her spirit, follows, and is
   also thus absorbed. There she remains, unable to do otherwise, so long
   as God binds the spirit to himself. The body, being subject to the
   soul, is deprived of its natural ailment, which without her aid she
   cannot receive, and is thrown out of its natural state. The spirit,
   meanwhile, is in the fit condition for that end for which it was
   created by God; and, stripped of all things, it rests in him as long
   as it is his good pleasure, provided that the body can endure it and
   live.

   The soul and the body then return to their natural action, and having
   been refreshed by the repose of the spirit, God again elevates it to
   its former state, and in this manner the animal imperfections are by
   degrees destroyed, and the soul, thus cleansed, remains pure spirit,
   and the body, purged from its evil habits and inclinations, is also
   pure and fitted to unite itself, without hindrance to the Spirit in
   due season. This work God effects by love alone, which is so great
   that it is incessantly seeking the profit and advantage of this Soul,
   his beloved.

   But the special work of which I speak, God performs without the aid of
   the Soul, and in the following manner: he fills her with a secret
   love, which deprives her of her natural life, so that the work carried
   on in her is wholly supernatural. She remains meanwhile in that sea of
   secret love which is so great that all who are drawn within it sink
   overwhelmed, for it overpowers the memory, the understanding, and the
   will: and to these powers, thus submerged in the divine love, all
   things else which approached them would be their hell, for they have
   been deprived of the natural life for which she Soul was created.

   Such a soul, while yet in this life, shares, in some degree, the
   happiness of the blessed; but this is hidden even from herself, for it
   is so great and high that she is unable to comprehend it, exceeding as
   it does the capacity of her powers, which look to nothing beyond, but
   rest satisfied and submerged in this sea of love. When created things
   are spoken of, her facilities, like fools, are powerless and lifeless,
   not knowing where they are; so hidden is this work in God. The further
   it advances, the more contented and strong to bear all that God
   pleases to accomplish in it, does the spirit become; but it
   comprehends no more on the account, for the soul, as if dead, knows
   nothing of this work nor takes any part therein.

   But the body, which must needs live on this earth while God is
   bringing the soul by its means to her destined perfection, how can it
   exist, alienated in all things from its natural condition? It can no
   longer use the understanding, the memory, or the will, for earthly
   purposes, nor does it take pleasure in spiritual things. It will live,
   then, in this way, in great torments: but God, whose works this is, is
   not willing that any but himself shall take part in it, and we shall
   now explain the means he uses.

   In what manner God keeps the Soul occupied in his love.--Of the
   weakness of the body and of the support it receives from
   creatures.--Of the extreme sufferings of Humanity, which it bemoans
   without complaining, being interiorly conformed to the will of
   God.--And how purgatory in this life is severe and sweet and full of
   mercy. 

   Sometimes this occupation of love was lightened and the Spirit allowed
   to take a breath, and to communicate with the Soul and the Soul with
   the Body, so that the senses of both were in a condition to receive
   some aid from created things, and were thus revived. But when God
   withdrew the Spirit into himself, all the rest followed it, the body
   remaining, as it were, dead, and so estranged from its natural state
   that when it again returned to it, it was entirely exhausted and could
   receive no help from any creature. Humanity could neither eat nor
   drink nor give any sign of life, so that it was led as a little child
   who can do nothing but weep. It could not enjoy that which nature
   desires, for it was deprived of taste and drawn out of its natural
   state.

   When the Soul had remained awhile in this condition, she turned toward
   her Lord with bitter lamentation, and said to him:

   Soul. Oh, my Lord, hitherto I have been in entire peace, contentment,
   and delight, for all my powers were in the enjoyment of the love
   bestowed on me by thee, and seemed as if they were in Paradise. Now
   they are driven from their home and find themselves in an unknown and
   strange country. Formerly the intellect, the memory, and the will,
   were conscious of thy love in all their operations, which they
   performed according to thy ordination, with great satisfaction to
   themselves and to all with whom they had to do: this was through thy
   sweet concurrence, which gave a zest to every act. Now I am naked and
   despoiled of all things and deprived of the power to love and to
   operate as I was wont to do. What then shall I do, living and yet
   dead, without understanding, without memory, and without will, and
   what is worse, without love, bereft of which I did not believe it
   possible to live, since man was created for love and for enjoyment,
   especially of God, his first object and his last end?

   This operation, which I behold for the first time, deprives me of love
   and of joy, and I am lost in myself, not knowing what to do or say.
   Oh, how hard and intolerable it is to live thus, especially since I
   see that all my powers accord with one another, having found repose in
   God, their object and their end; and although they are ignorant of
   this work, yet in their ignorance they remain content!

   But abandoned and deserted Humanity, how shall it live, parched,
   naked, and powerless? It has eyes and sees not; nostrils and smells
   not; ears and hears not; mouth and tastes not; a heart and cannot
   love! Every mode of life is found in that hidden love; but how is he
   to live to whom that love brings death, whose senses are all awake,
   but who cannot use them as others do?

   And therefore, Humanity said, lamenting:

   Me, miserable, alone in this world, what shall I do? I shall live in
   wretchedness, and none will have compassion on me, because this work
   will not be recognized as that of God, inasmuch as I must needs live,
   almost continually, in a different way from others, whether they be
   seculars or religious, and do things that will be looked upon as
   folly. There remains neither order nor regularity in my life, and for
   this reason it will rather scandalize than edify.

   Alas! alas! that I should behold a work so cruel to Humanity! It is as
   if I were in a heated furnace, with the entrance closed, neither dead
   nor alive, and in dread of being reduced to ashes; yet I complain not,
   for interiorly I am in conformity with the will of God, who holds me
   in this condition according to a design neither known nor comprehended
   by the Soul herself; but the effect is shown in the execution of the
   work. It is Humanity which feels the torment, without complaining; yet
   if it could lament it would be refreshed.

   Oh, what a sweet and cruel purgatory is this hidden one on earth! It
   is sweet in comparison with the purgatory of the life to come, but to
   us it appears cruel when we see a body on this earth suffering so
   intolerably. Yet what seems cruelty to us is truly a great mercy of
   God, although a hidden and unsuspected one. To him who is enlightened,
   this work is evidently done by love only the blind would endeavor to
   escape it, but in vain. We are all sinners, and how much better is it
   to be cleansed here than in the other life! For whoever suffers
   purgation in this life pays but a small portion of what is due, by
   reason of the liberty of his free-will cooperating with infused grace.
   God never subjects man to this discipline until he has obtained from
   him his free consent. For a moment it is put before him, and accepting
   it of his own free-will, he puts himself into the hands of God to be
   dealt with according to his pleasure. But this is hidden from
   Humanity.

   The Spirit having given consent, God binds the Soul unto himself, and
   thereafter it remains in these bonds, which are never broken. All this
   is done without Humanity, which must be subject to the decree of God
   and the good pleasure of the Spirit. And when it finds itself in such
   subjection, it cries aloud like one who is suddenly wounded, and
   because it does not know the end, it is left to its lamentations while
   God continues his work, giving no heed unto its cries.

   Humanity, thus menaced, desires to know the cause.--This is promised
   her.--God, while seeking men, draws them by different means and
   inspirations.--Of her continual sorrow. How, in her affliction, she
   calls upon God to relieve her by one ray of his love.--When she comes
   to understand the grace God has given her, she is pierced by a new
   dart of love.--Of her confession and contrition. 

   Humanity, finding itself menaced by various sufferings, through which
   it must needs pass, being unable to defend itself, sought to know the
   cause for which it must endure a martyrdom without alleviation. It was
   answered interiorly, that a release would be granted in due season,
   and it became as one sentenced to death, who, having heard the
   sentence pronounced upon his evil deeds resigns himself to an
   ignominious end and thus sometimes escapes it.

   "In my infinite and ever-active love," spake God, "I continually go
   forth in search of souls, in order to guide them to life eternal; and,
   illuminating them with my light, I move the free-will of men in many
   and diverse ways. When man yields to my inspirations, I increase this
   light, and by its aid he sees himself imprisoned, as it were, in a
   foul and dismal den, surrounded by a brood of venomous reptiles which
   strive to destroy him but which he saw not before by reason of the
   darkness. By the light I grant him, he sees his peril and calls upon
   me to free him in mercy from the miseries which hem him in on every
   side. I am ever illuminating him more and more, and, as his light
   grows clearer, and he discovers more plainly the dangers which
   surround him, he cries aloud and with bitter tears: `O my God! take me
   hence and do with me what thou wilt. I can endure all things if thou
   wilt release me from this misery and peril!'"

   It appeared to this Soul that God turned a deaf ear to her
   lamentations; but he increased her light daily, and with its growth
   her anguish likewise deepened, for by it she saw not only her own
   danger, but that no way of escape was open to her. Long did she cry to
   God for help, for so he had decreed, and though he gave her no reply,
   he yet had regard to her perseverance, and kindled in her heart a
   hidden fire, while at the same time he reveled to her her
   imperfections. In this manner she was for a season restrained and
   overwhelmed in her own wretchedness. She ate no other bread, and lived
   in continual sorrow; moreover, as the light of grace increased, the
   flesh was consumed away and the blood cleansed from its superfluous
   humors. She was so weakened and afflicted that she could scarcely
   move, and in her desolation she cried aloud to God: Miserere mei Deus
   secundum magnam misericordiam tuam (Psalm 50).

   And God, when he saw her entirely abandoned to his mercy and
   despairing of herself, revived her with a ray of his love whereby he
   made her see anew the magnitude of her defects, and that hell alone
   was their fitting retribution. She recognized, moreover, the singular
   grace which God had bestowed upon her, and as she beheld it, she was
   pierced afresh with love and grief at her offences against such great
   goodness. She began to confess her sins with such deep and
   extraordinary contrition that she seemed ready to perform every
   possible penance of soul and body.

   Contrition, confession, and satisfaction, are the first works of the
   Soul after it has been enlightened by God. By this means she is freed
   from her sins and imperfections, clothed with virtue, and remains thus
   until she has formed the habit of virtue.

   God sends into that heart another ray of love, which, diffusing
   itself, fills the soul and revives the body.--There is nothing but
   exceeding love and joy, until this love, which is wholly from God, has
   completed its work. 

   God once more infused into the Soul another ray of love, and by its
   superabundance the body also was refreshed, and there was nothing but
   love and rejoicing of heart, for the Soul believed herself in
   paradise. In this state the Soul continued until every love except
   that of God was entirely consumed, and with his love alone she
   remained until she was wholly absorbed in him. He bestowed upon her
   many graces and sent her many sweet consolations, upon which she fed
   as do all those who share the divine love. He spoke to her also in
   those loving words which, like flame, penetrate the hearts of those
   who hear them. The body, moreover, was so inflamed, that it seemed as
   if the Soul must quit it in order to unite herself with her Love. This
   was to her a season of great peace and consolation, for all her
   nourishment was the food of eternal life.

   In this state she feared neither martyrdom nor hell nor any opposition
   or adversity that might befall her, for it seemed to her that with
   this love she could endure all things. O loving and rejoicing heart! O
   happy soul that has tasted this love! Thou canst no longer enjoy or
   behold aught beside, for thou hast attained thy rest for which thou
   wert created! O sweet and secret love: whoever tastes thee can no
   longer exist without thee! Thou, O man! who wert created for this
   love, how canst thou be satisfied and at peace without it? How canst
   thou live? In it is comprised all that can be desired, and it yields a
   satisfaction so entire that man can neither obtain it for himself nor
   even conceive it until he has experienced it. O love! in which are
   united all bliss and all delight, and which satisfies all desire!

   Whoever could express the emotions of a heart enamored of God, would
   break every other heart with longing, although it were harder than the
   diamond and perverser than the devil. O flame of love! thou dost
   consume all rust, and so completely removest every shadow of defect
   that the least imperfection disappears before thee. So perfectly dost
   thou thy work in the Soul, that she is cleansed even from those
   defects that are seen by thine eye alone, to which even that which
   seems to us perfection is full of faults.

   O Love! thou dost wholly cleanse and purify us; thou dost enlighten
   and strengthen our understanding, and dost even perform for us our
   necessary works, and this through thy pure love alone which meets with
   no return from us.

   And now this Soul, filled with astonishment at beholding God so
   enamored of her, questions him concerning his love.

   The Soul asks concerning this love.--Our Lord in part answers her and
   discourses to her upon its greatness, nature, properties, causes and
   effects. 

   Soul. O Lord! what is that soul which thou holdest in such esteem and
   which we value so little? I would that I knew the cause of thy great
   and pure love for the rational creature whom I behold so contrary in
   all things to thee!

   Our Lord listened favorably to her request and thus replied: "If you
   were to know how much I love the soul, you would never know aught
   further, for you would either die or continue to live by a miracle.
   And if you were able to compare your own misery with that great love
   and goodness which I never cease to exercise toward man, you would
   live in despair. So powerful is my love that the knowledge of it would
   annihilate not only the body but the soul of man, if that were
   possible. My love is infinite, and I cannot but love that which I have
   created; my love is pure, simple, and sincere, neither can I love
   except with such a love.

   "To him who could in the least understand this, every other love would
   seem, what in truth it is, an aberration. The cause of my love is only
   love itself; and because you cannot comprehend, it be at peace and
   seek not for what you cannot find. This, my love, is better
   comprehended by an interior sense than by any other way, and to
   acquire this the action of love must wholly detach man from himself,
   for he is his own worst impediment. This love destroys malice and fits
   man to understand the nature of love."

   O admirable work of love, which gives God to man that he may do all
   that is needful to attain that perfection for which he is designed!
   God gives him, too, all needful light and grace, increasing them
   gradually in such a manner and to such a degree that they never fail
   and never exceed; for if they fell short, man might excuse himself
   from doing his part because grace was wanting to him, and if they
   exceeded, the work he might have done through their means but failed
   to do, would be his punishment.

   Grace increases in proportion as man makes use of it. Hence it is
   evident that God gives man from day to day all that he needs, no more
   and no less, and to each according to his condition and capacity. All
   this he does for the love and benefit of man; but because we are so
   cold and negligent in our endeavors, and because the instinct of the
   spirit is to arrive quickly at perfection, it seems as if grace were
   insufficient. Yet it is not so, and the fault is wholly ours, in not
   cooperating with the grace already received, which therefore ceases to
   increase.

   O wretched man! how shall you be excused for failing to correspond
   with that great love and care which God has always bestowed and still
   bestows upon you? At the hour of death you will behold and know all
   this, and you will then be speechless through astonishment. Then the
   truth will be made plain and you will have no power to contradict it.
   Shame will overpower you for having failed to do your part in response
   to all this aid, this grace, this loving care of your Lord, who, in
   order to satisfy your other request, speaks to you thus:

   God reveals to the Soul that the body is to be purgatory for her in
   this world.--How necessary it is that man should deny himself and
   become wholly lost in God.--Of the misery of man when he occupies
   himself with aught beside, since he has no time but the present to
   acquire a treasure of merit. 

   The Lord. The cause of all the suffering through which you have to
   pass is better understood by experience than by reasoning. Yet know
   this: I make of the body a purgatory for the soul, and thus augment
   her glory by drawing her to me through this purgatory alone. And thus
   I am ever knocking at the door of the heart, and if man yields consent
   and opens to me, I lead him with continual and loving care to that
   degree of glory for which I created him. If he could see and
   understand the care with which I promote his salvation and his
   welfare, quitting and despising all ease, even were the universe at
   his command, he would abandon himself without reserve to me.

   There is no martyrdom that he would not endure, if it would preserve
   him from losing this loving care which is leading him to the highest
   glory. I would draw him to me by love and faith alone, to which fear
   and self-interest are opposed, because they spring from the love of
   self, which cannot coexist with that pure and simple love which alone
   must absorb man if he would not cast off my care of him. Without this
   aid he could not enter into the clear depths of my love, for it would
   be a hell to him. And man, having no other way and no other time but
   this life in which to purify his soul by love and faith, and with the
   assistance of my grace, is it not a misery for him to occupy himself
   with aught beside, and thus lose the precious time which was given him
   for this work alone? Once passed, it will never more return. Listen
   then, O Soul, my beloved! listen to my voice; open thine ears to thy
   Lord who so much loves thee, who is ever caring for thee, and who
   alone is thy salvation! Steeped in sin as thou art, sunk in such
   misery and weighed down with evil habits, thou wilt never know the
   greatness of thy woes until my light unveils them to thee and frees
   thee from them!

   Soul. Thou hast given me, Lord, many persuasive reasons why I should
   suffer as I have done and must still do; yet, I pray thee, if it
   please thee, satisfy my understanding concerning the cause of this
   suffering, for I need it greatly when I am overpowered by the
   vehemence of thy love.

   The Lord. Thou knowest that when thou didst yield up thy will to me
   thou wert sunk so low that had I not prevented thee thou wouldst have
   fallen into hell. Thou wert borne away into sin and misery like one
   bound hand and foot. I granted thee light and contrition, by the help
   of which thou didst make thy confession. Thou hast performed many
   penances, and for a long time offered prayers and alms in satisfaction
   for thy sins. I left thee to struggle and torment thyself until thou
   wert well established in virtue, that thou mightest not hence forward
   fall into sin. I allowed thee to practice various virtues in order
   that thou shouldst be confirmed and take pleasure in them and never
   more turn to other enjoyments.

   And now the Soul began to delight in spiritual things, and was
   assailed by many temptations, and was thus practised in the ways of
   God. The providence of God was also made plain to her in many trials
   and persecutions which she endured from men, from devils, and from
   herself. For, being accustomed to wrong-doing, it was necessary for
   her to combat all these enemies until she had destroyed them, inasmuch
   as it is they who were ever warring against her. And if it were not
   for our evil habits no one would ever be tempted except in consequence
   of the increase of grace, and this is a temptation which is without
   danger, because God sustains by his love those upon whom he permits it
   to fall.

   The Soul, confirmed in virtue, begins to rest in her Lord.--God
   permits her to see that loving operations whereby, through his great
   goodness alone, he had liberated her.--The Soul, perceiving her own
   miseries, burns with a continual flame and is unable to speak or thing
   of aught besides. 

   When God had despoiled this Soul of her evil habits and clothed her
   with virtue, and had well instructed her in the spiritual life, she
   began to rest in her Lord. Her battle and her servitude being ended,
   she was filled with a great joy, especially when God opened her eyes
   to see how greatly he had assisted her, and how he had defended her
   from her enemies, both visible and invisible, and from herself, who
   was the worst of all. The Soul, discerning the providence of God, and
   finding herself entirely freed from her interior trials, began to turn
   towards her Lord, who, designing to raise her to a higher state,
   caused her to behold with the eye of divine love the loving operation
   which he had accomplished in her. When she beheld his great and
   watchful care she was lost in astonishment, and considered what God
   was and what she herself was; that is, how low she was in misery and
   sorrow and how his goodness alone had rescued her by pure and simple
   love, and prepared her by amorous modes and ways to receive his divine
   love. This vision made her confess with bitter tears her woes and
   sins; and the love which God manifested to her continued to inflame
   her in such a manner that she could speak and think of nothing else.
   And in this state she remained until all other loves, both spiritual
   and natural, were entirely consumed.

   And because the love of God, inasmuch as it is lonely and remote from
   other loves, is so much the greater, and more vehemently occupies the
   soul (for it is ever increasing, and works secretly, not only on
   others but also on itself), therefore the Soul, finding herself in
   this state, enjoyed all things, interior as well as exterior, in
   peace, in love, and in delight; for she did not yet know the way by
   which God intended to lead her, although she was approaching it. And
   God spake thus to her:

   Our Lord makes known to the Soul that she had merited nothing, having
   employed in purifying herself the time which was given her to increase
   in grace and glory.--Also he shows her that without his help she could
   have done nothing. 

   The Lord. My daughter, hitherto you have followed the odor of my
   perfumes, which have guided and supported you thus far upon your way;
   but without me you could have done nothing. In this way, my grace
   assisting, you are purged from your sins, despoiled of your
   affections, habited in virtue, burning with love, and as it were,
   united with me in love, and so full of delight, both inwardly and
   outwardly, that you seem to yourself to be in paradise.

   But understand that hitherto you have merited nothing, for whatever
   you have done in the way of penance, fasting, alms, and prayers, you
   were obliged to do; it was needful for you to perform them all by my
   light in order to cancel your debts. And having not the means
   wherewith to satisfy, I have granted you these through love for you,
   that you might by them make satisfaction: and know, that all this time
   which you have spent in satisfying for your sins is as if it were
   lost, for it was given you that you might increase in love, grace, and
   glory; therefore, you have merited nothing, although it may seem to
   you that you have done great things, and such as are highly esteemed
   by those who do not understand them.

   It was also necessary that you should be clothed with the virtues
   which attract love, that they might protect you from evil and prepare
   you to receive greater light; and knowing that of yourself you were
   unfit for any good work and also incapable of it, I have given you (in
   order that you might work and persevere in work) a hidden love, by
   whose operations all your facilities and also your bodily senses
   should be voluntarily disposed to make satisfaction. I have given you,
   moreover, the power to love me, in order to detach you from every
   other love, and finally I have conducted you to the portals of my true
   and perfect love, beyond which you have not advanced, for to do so is
   beyond your strength. And with all this you are not yet content, for
   you have the instinct to advance, although you know not even what you
   desire.

   The Spirit, seeing the Soul brought to the gates of divine love,
   resolves to subject both Soul and Body to severe suffering.--He tells
   the Soul that he will separate himself from her, and that in order to
   recover her first purity, she must pass through many trials. 

   When the Spirit saw the Soul led to the portals of divine love, from
   which she was neither able to advance nor to recede, and saw,
   moreover, that she had been conducted thus far with much assistance
   from God, who had pleasantly occupied without wholly satisfying all
   her facilities, he thus spake:

   Spirit. Now is the time for me to repay the Soul for what she has done
   to me. For many years I have been subject to her, and, with cruelties
   too great to be described, excluded from my home; for she was so
   restrained and oppressed by earthly things that the powers I possessed
   were not sufficient to enable me to attend to my own spiritual
   concerns. I called to my aid the certainty of death, the fear of hell,
   the hope of heaven, preaching, and all other aids afforded by the
   Church; and also divine inspirations, infirmities, poverty, and other
   worldly tribulations, in order that, deprived of all things earthly,
   she might, in her extreme need, when all other resources had failed
   her, have recourse unto God. But, though in her great necessity she
   sometimes turned to him and promised with his assistance to do great
   things, yet when that moment was passed she returned to her accustomed
   practices and I to my prison; and this has happened many times. But
   now that I see my Soul, with her senses, and also those of the body,
   arrived at a point from which she can neither advance nor recede, I
   will subject and restrain them all in such a way that they can neither
   impede nor retard me. Complaints will not avail them; they will be as
   much at my discretion as I have been at theirs; but I shall not be as
   cruel to them as they have been to me, for they never afforded me the
   smallest help, even when I was most oppressed and surrounded by my
   enemies. I will keep the Soul in restraint and in subjection, and
   inflict upon her, without mercy, all the suffering she can bear. I
   have her in my hands, and I will leave her so naked, desolate, and
   forsaken, that she will know not where to turn except for the bare
   necessities which will keep her alive to suffer a yet longer
   martyrdom; and this will be in secret in order that no one may give
   her any remedy. Not one of her members shall escape suffering until my
   work is finished; whosoever shall behold her in such torments will
   wish her dead, and she would herself wish it if she could do so
   without sin.

   Soul. I have heard enough of your threats, and am sufficiently well
   acquainted with the prospect of what I am to suffer; but the reason of
   this suffering I have not been able to understand, although it has
   been promised to me.

   Spirit. I mean to separate myself from you, and for the present I will
   answer you in words; hereafter I will do so more effectually by deeds
   which will make you envy the dead.

   You have been conducted even to this threshold by many gentle means
   and divine graces, which you have assumed and appropriated to
   yourself, and have hidden them with a subtlety of which you are not
   yourself aware, for they have become your by such long use that no eye
   but that of God can discern them; neither would you believe it, did
   not God himself declare it. Gradually you will come to understand by
   experience, that even in the first light that was given you, you
   appropriated your share, and so of contrition, confession,
   satisfaction, prayer, and other virtuous acts; of interior and
   exterior detachment; of the sweet love of God, of the alienation of
   the bodily senses, so that they appeared as if dead because they were
   entirely controlled by the divine operation. And inasmuch as those
   works had long sustained your faculties, and the love of God was so
   strong and powerful within you, you seemed to yourself to be in
   heaven, and enjoyed it all within yourself as if it were yours by
   right, and had been bestowed on you by God as the reward of your
   merits. You did not return it wholly and entirely to him as you should
   have done in all simplicity and uprightness, and in this you have been
   dishonest and have defiled yourself, and therefore you must suffer all
   I have foretold you. Learn what a task it is to purge a soul here
   below and restore her with no further purgatory to her pristine
   purity. And when it is God's will to elevate her to a high degree of
   glory, it becomes more especially necessary, not alone to purify her
   but to make her pass through many cruel sufferings that she may gain
   merit by many and grievous pains.

   When the time came which pleased God, he drew the Spirit so secretly
   and closely to himself, that it held no communication with the Soul
   nor the Soul with the Body, and both were left so bare and dry that it
   was hard for them to live at all, and especially at the first, when
   they were passing from one extreme to the other, although God was
   secretly attracting them by little and little. At length that befell
   the Soul, which happens to a bombshell, when the fire being applied it
   explodes and loses both fire and powder; thus the Soul, having
   conceived the fire of pure, divine love, suddenly lost that which had
   before inflamed her, and, deprived of all sensibility, could never
   more return to it. She resembled a musical instrument which, while
   furnished with strings, sends forth sweet melody, but, being deprived
   of them, is silent. So she, who had hitherto with the senses of both
   Soul and body, discoursed such sweet music, now, bereft of these,
   remained stringless and mute. When she found herself closely pressed
   by the Spirit, with no hope of relief (for she remembered all his
   threats), she cried to God, and said:

   The Soul discovers that she must make satisfaction voluntarily, and it
   seems to her that she is abandoned by God.--She calls upon others for
   help.--How Humanity, by whom she had been threatened, is put to the
   proof.--Of the sufferings of the Body when deprived of communications
   with the Spirit. 

   Soul. Lord, I see it to be necessary that I should atone for my
   dishonest appropriation of thy spiritual graces, and I begin to
   understand that as I have consented to take part with the body in sin,
   and have found pleasure in it, I must also consent that it shall be
   expiated by my own sufferings as well as by those of the body, and
   that I must pay, even to the last farthing. I see that I have secretly
   robbed thee of what was thine, and have appropriated many
   satisfactions, and delighted in many spiritual graces, without
   referring them all to thee as was my duty; namely, many sweet
   consolations in speaking, hearing, tasting, and in various other
   things. I perceive that this robbery was very serious, since nothing
   more precious could be stolen. For these are the things which
   essentially differ from all that is man's own. Nothing is of real
   value to him, except that which it pleases thee to give him by thy
   grace. Therefore it is necessary for us to comprehend that every grace
   proceeds from thee, and to thee it must be returned, if we would not
   be robbers: this robbery originated with the devil by whom we are
   continually tempted and by whom many are led astray.

   But how shall I satisfy myself for this great and subtle sin, since I
   have neither strength nor feeling, either of soul or body? I know not
   whether I am alive or dead. It is hard to live in this world, and yet
   I must both live and suffer greatly, in order to expiate my offences.
   I seem to be abandoned by the divine and through the knowledge of that
   which, not to others but to thee alone, my God, is fully known, that I
   would always rob thee. Finding myself deserted on every side, give me
   at least one who can understand and comfort me, as is done to the
   condemned, that they may not wholly despair.

   Then God comforted Humanity somewhat, and afterwards exercised her in
   that with which she had before been threatened. The body by degrees
   became infirm, being deprived of the correspondence of the Spirit,
   which held the powers of the Soul suspended and engaged, while the
   body remained naked, famished, wretched, and unconscious that this was
   the work of God. Hence, it rapidly consumed away and felt every slight
   evil as a great calamity, and its infirmity increased to such a degree
   that if it kept the Soul intent on some hidden operation, the body
   would not have been able to support itself. Exteriorly, too, he gave
   her a director adapted to her need, who comprehended the work of God
   within her. This was a great consolation, for her natural forces could
   not have sustained her under trials so great that they could neither
   be described by human tongue, nor, if described, be understood. Even
   if witnessed by the bodily eye they would be incomprehensible, so much
   greater was the interior suffering than the exterior, and so
   impossible was it for any way or kind of relief to be found. But God
   now and then afforded Humanity a little relief, and she seemed
   restored, although the interior oppression was constantly increasing.
   So she wandered about the house, wasting away, and ignorant of the
   nature of her malady, so subtle, hidden, and penetrating was that
   divine work.

   Then she was assailed in a different manner and with strange and new
   afflictions, against which she struggled with all her powers. When God
   afflicted the body, he fortified the mind, and when the mind was
   suffering, he consoled the body, and thus supported each in turn. She
   continued in this state for about ten years, Humanity being always
   more and more unconscious of those hidden operations by which God held
   her, as it were, bound.

   Afterwards he took from her her confessor, and everything else towards
   which she looked for help. Then the Spirit drew her forcibly to
   himself, because he, in turn, was drawn by God with a hidden love, so
   penetrating and powerful, though without delight, that it melted into
   itself both Soul and Spirit, while the bodily senses, with everything
   else, were absorbed in God.

   This hidden love checked, purged, and exterminated all those sins of
   robbery which had been so secretly and cunningly committed, and thus
   in secret the penance was performed while the cause remained
   concealed. Humanity was so oppressed and crushed that she was
   constrained to cry to our Lord in piteous accents:

   "Oh, my God! how hast thou abandoned me to such cruel sufferings, both
   interior and exterior! Yet, while I suffer I am still unable to
   complain, for even when I am most grievously afflicted, I am in secret
   satisfied by a sharp and searching flame of love, which is gradually
   consuming all my natural and spiritual strength, so that it is most
   strange to see a creature living thus deprived of vital force. My
   confessor, too, is taken from me, so that I can no longer take counsel
   of him, and so weak have I become that I can turn to nothing with any
   spirit. Interiorly I find the secret strength which was given me
   decaying, nor am I in a condition to receive anything from heaven, or
   earth, but am left like one dead. Yet I must live so long as it
   pleases God, though I know not how I can live without the help which I
   am not even able to receive when it is offered me."

   Of the brightness of eternal glory, and of the strength imparted to
   Humanity by a glimpse of it.--How God draws the Spirit to himself, so
   that it may be wholly occupied in him.--Of its sufferings.--What it is
   to live on earth while the Spirit is in heaven, and through what
   sufferings one must pass in order to escape purgatory. 

   Towards the close of this process, God came to her aid in a different
   manner. He sometimes revealed to her a ray of that glory towards which
   she approached, as the affections of the Soul and the bodily
   sensations became weaker. This revived her so much, both interiorly
   and exteriorly, that it supported her for many days; for although she
   beheld it but a moment, the impression, without any renewal, remained
   within. And she saw that God held her Spirit so fixed upon himself
   that he did not allow it to weaver for an instant. The longer this
   continued the more difficult it was to withdraw from it, the
   difficulty being too great for words to express. And this was by
   reason of that hidden Spirit which found itself drawn into greater
   depths the higher it ascended towards God, and continually losing its
   own strength as it became more and more absorbed in God, who thus
   spake to the Soul:

   The Lord. Henceforth I will not have you interfere with my designs,
   for you would always rob me by appropriating to yourself what is not
   yours. I will finish the work, and you shall be unconscious of it. I
   will separate you from your Spirit, and he shall be lost in my abyss.

   Humanity on hearing this was filled with consternation, and said:

   "I am in misery. I do not live, and yet I cannot die, but find myself
   every day more and more oppressed, and, as it were, consuming away.
   When I beheld what it was to be centered entirely in God without a
   single moment's respite, and that I was myself the miserable creature
   who was to support this siege, and how very terrible it was, all my
   flesh was in torment. To remain thus steadily occupied in God, without
   a moment's wavering, is a thing for the blessed in heaven, who, lost
   to themselves, live only in him. That I should live in this way upon
   earth while my Spirit is in heaven, is a work surpassing all that I
   have known, and is the most terrible suffering that can be endured in
   this world."

   It was shown to Humanity that whoever would enter life eternal without
   passing through purgatory, must die to this world while yet in it;
   that is, that all the imperfections of the Soul must be so consumed
   that she may remain absorbed in God. "But hearing thee weep, O
   Humanity! it is plain that thou art not yet dead, and thou must still
   live until thou findest life without impediment. When thy vivacity is
   all passed away, and thy sensibility is weakened, thou wilt have less
   to endure. Thou wilt not anticipate thy sufferings afar off as now
   thou dost, with agitation, but wilt abandon thyself to God, not
   through the powers of the Soul, nor through any instinct of nature,
   but purely because God has taken upon himself all these things, and
   works so secretly and subtly that he in whom the work is wrought is
   not himself aware of it."

   This God does, that man may be sensible of the suffering inflicted on
   him, for otherwise he would feel it less, and if he comprehended what
   was going on, he would always be guilty of robbery, even if he were
   not led to it by his evil instincts, united to the bad habits, hidden
   in the depths of his soul. But God, knowing that man could not live in
   so great an extremity if he did not provide for him, does so secretly
   and in various modes and times, according to his necessity. At first
   the assistance is very evident, that he may with love persevere and
   form the habit of doing spiritual works; then, by degrees, God
   withdraws these supports whenever he finds the man strong enough to
   endure the battle. The greater strength he has at the beginning, the
   greater suffering he may look for toward the end, although God always
   assists him according to his necessities; yet he does this far more
   secretly than openly, and never ceases but at death.

   Containing some questions concerning the love of God towards man,
   proposed by the Soul to her Lord, and his loving answers, the truth of
   which was afterwards entirely proved by the Blessed One herself. 


   The Soul inquires of God the reason of his great love for man, who is
   so opposed to him; and also what is man, for whom he cares so much. 

   Soul. O, Lord, when I see thee so enamored of man, I long to know the
   cause of this great love, especially as in his manner of life, man is
   so opposed to thy will, estranged from thy love, averse to thy
   operations, contrary to thee in all things, full of this world, blind,
   deaf, dumb, and stupid, without the power and without the means of
   acting according to thy will. I confess, O Lord, that I know not what
   is this man of whom thou art so mindful; I know not whether thou art
   his master or his servant; it seems to me as if love had so blinded
   thee that thou seest not the depth of his miseries. I pray thee, O my
   Lord, to satisfy me fully in this matter.

   The Lord. You demand a thing beyond your comprehension; yet, in order
   to satisfy your understanding, which in these matters is weak and
   uninformed, I will show you a scintillation of this love which if you
   should behold clearly you could not live if I did not sustain you by
   my grace.

   Know then, in the first place, that I am God, with whom there is no
   change; and know too that I loved man before I created him. I loved
   him with a love which is infinite, pure, simple, and sincere, and
   without any cause; it is impossible that I should not love those whom
   I have created and designed for my glory, each in his own degree. I
   have also provided him amply with all needful means of attaining his
   end, both with natural gifts and supernatural graces, and on my part
   these never fail him. I am ever surrounding him with my infinite love,
   now in one way and now in another, that I may bring him under my care.
   I find in him nothing which is contrary to me but the free-will which
   I have given him, and this I am always combating through love, until
   he yields it to me, and when I have accepted it I reform it little by
   little by my secret operations and loving care, and never abandon him
   until I have conducted him to his appointed end.

   To your other question, as to why I love man, who is opposed to me and
   laden with sins that are so hateful in the sight of heaven, I answer,
   that by reason of the infinite bounty and pure love with which I love
   him, I can neither see his defects nor fail to accomplish my work,
   which is purely to benefit him; I cast such a light on his defects
   that perforce he sees them, and doing so he bewails them, and
   bewailing them he purges himself from them. He offends me only when he
   puts hindrances in the way by which I am endeavoring to lead him to
   his end; that is, when he hinders me, by mortal sin, from
   accomplishing my loving designs according to his necessities. But that
   love which you desire to know is beyond your comprehension, for it has
   neither form nor limit; neither can you know it through the intellect,
   for it is not intelligible; it is in part made known by its effects,
   which are small or great in proportion to the measure of love which is
   brought into action.

   If one who had not lost faith should desire to see the effects of this
   work which is accomplished in man by that spark of love which infuses
   into his heart, be assured that he would be so inflamed by love that
   he could not live, for so great would be its power that he would melt
   away and be no more. Though men are for the most part forever in
   ignorance of it, yet, for this hidden love, you see those who abandon
   the world, leave their possessions, friends, and kindred, and hold in
   abhorrence all other loves and joys. For this love men have sold
   themselves as slaves, and remained in bondage to others until death;
   and its force increases so continually that they would suffer
   martyrdom for it a thousand times, as they have often done and will
   ever continue to do.

   You see this love transforms beasts into men, men into angels, and
   angels becoming God, as it were, by participation. You see men changed
   from earthly into heavenly, and devoting themselves with both soul and
   body to the practice of spiritual things. Their whole life and manner
   of speech are altered, and they do and say the contrary of what was
   formerly their custom. All are surprised at this, and yet it seems
   good to all, and men are almost envious of it.

   But unless by experience, no one comprehends how this has been brought
   about. That deep sweet, and penetrating love which man feels in his
   heart is unknown, and can neither be described nor understood except
   by the light of the affections in whose exercise he feels himself
   occupied, bound, transformed, in peace and harmony with the bodily
   sensations, and without any contradiction, so that he has nothing,
   wills nothing, and desires nothing. He remains quiet and satisfied in
   his inmost heart, knowing this love and knowing it alone. He is kept
   closely bound by a very subtle thread, held secretly by the hand of
   God, who leaves him to struggle and combat with the world, the devils,
   and himself, while fainting weak, and helpless, he fears ruin on every
   side but God does not let him fall.

   The true love which you are striving, O Soul, to comprehend, is not
   this, but is seen only when I have consumed the imperfections of man
   by every mode of human misery, both exterior and interior. As for that
   which cannot be seen, this is my mode of action. I let down into the
   heart of man the slender, golden thread of my hidden love, to which is
   attached a hook which enters the heart, and man feels himself wounded,
   but knows not by whom he is bound and taken. He neither moves nor
   wishes to move, because his heart is drawn by me, its object and its
   end, although he does not comprehend it; but it is I who hold the
   thread in my hand, and draw it even closer with a love so penetrating
   and so subtle, that man is conquered and subdued and entirely taken
   out of himself.

   As the feet of one who has been hanged do not touch the earth, but his
   body remains attached to the cord by which he received his death, so
   the Spirit remains suspended by the slender thread of love whereby all
   the subtle and hidden imperfections of man receive their death: all
   that he now loves he loves by virtue of the tie by which he is bound.
   All his actions are done by means of that love and through sanctifying
   grace, because it is now God who works alone, by his pure love and
   without man's assistance. And God, having thus taken man into his own
   keeping, and drawn him entirely to himself, so enriches him with his
   favors that when he comes to die he finds himself drawn unconsciously
   by that thread of love into the divine abyss. And although man in this
   state appears a lifeless, lost, and abject thing, yet his life is
   hidden in God amid the treasures of eternal life; nor can it be told
   or imagined what God has prepared for this beloved Soul.

   The Soul, hearing all this, is so inflamed by ardent love that she
   breaks forth into exclamations:

   Exclamations of the Soul.--Our Lord demands the cause of her surprise,
   and questions her concerning her enjoyment in the company of spiritual
   persons, and of the pleasing conversations held with them. 

   Soul. O tongue, why dost thou speak, when thou canst find no fitting
   words for the love felt by my heart? O heart, inflamed with love, why
   dost thou not consume the body where thou dwellest? O Spirit, what
   dost thou, thus bound upon the earth? Seest thou not that vehemence of
   love wherewith God attracts and desires thee? Destroy this body, that
   each may go to his own place!

   And God, when he beheld the Soul kindled with a flame so great and
   limitless, desiring in some measure to restrain her, showed her one
   spark of that love with which he loves man, and which is so pure,
   simple, and sincere that the Soul when she beheld it was wellnigh
   overpowered with astonishment; then the Lord demanded of her, saying:

   The Lord. Why do I behold you thus changed? What new thing have you
   seen that kindles in you such a flame of love? Hitherto you have
   seemed ready to break through the body in order to find your love, by
   reason of the great delight and sweet enjoyment you tasted, together
   with many other of your friends, with whom you were united in the
   bonds of that sweet and winning love; but now I see you pausing and
   bewildered, and caring to converse with no one.

   Until now this Soul had often occupied herself in conversing with her
   spiritual friends on the divine love, until it seemed to them as if
   they were already in paradise. Oh, how sweet were these colloquies!
   Both he who spoke and he who listened were fed alike upon that
   spiritual, sweet, and delicious food, and were not satisfied to see
   time pass so quickly while they talked, but all inflamed and burning,
   could neither speak nor separate, and seemed as if beside themselves.
   O feasts of love! O food most exquisite! What delicious viands, what
   sweet union, what divine company! They spoke only of the love of God,
   of its operations, and how all hindrances to it might be removed. All
   that took place between them was so clearly seen to be from God and
   for the benefit of souls, that no one could think otherwise, and hence
   the Soul responded:

   The Soul discovers that what she had been doing, as if for God,
   proceeded truly from Self-Love.--She is filled with astonishment at
   the sight of pure love, and inquires concerning its nature.--Our Lord
   answers her that she could not understand it, and that he himself,
   being love, can be comprehended only in his effects. 

   Soul. Thou hast shown me, O Lord, another light in which I have seen
   that it is Self-Love which has hitherto moved me, and that all which
   has had the semblance of being wrought so lovingly for thee and in
   thee was self-defiled and of my own doing, and secretly appropriated
   to myself. It was hidden in me, my God, beneath thy shadow, under
   which I rested. But now that I behold thy simple, pure, and ardent
   love, with its operations, I am lost and bewildered, and all other
   loves seem to me worse than selfish. O divine love, where shall I find
   words to speak of thee? I am conquered and subdued by thee; I am dying
   of love and I do not feel love; I am annihilated in love and I do not
   know love; I feel love acting within me, and its action I do not
   understand; I feel my heart burning with love, and yet I do not see
   the flame of love.

   O my God, I cannot cease to search for tokens of thy care; and
   although I am wholly overpowered by the new light which thou hast
   shown me, I do not yet despair of knowing more fully this love which,
   containing within itself everything that is desirable in heaven and on
   earth, satisfies man without satiating him, and even constantly
   increases the appetite which feeds upon it. It is so sweet and gentle,
   this pure and simple love, and so adapted to the heart of man, that he
   who has once enjoyed it, though but a little, would never cease to
   seek it, though the search should cost him a thousand lives. What is
   this love which conquers all things? Thou, Lord, hast told me many
   things concerning it, but they all seem to me to fall short; and since
   thou hast given me the burning desire to penetrate it more deeply, I
   will not believe that it can be in vain. Thou hast promised me a
   fuller satisfaction than I have attained. Thou hast shown me a spark
   of thy pure and simple love, and it has kindled in my heart a flame
   that devours me. Nowhere on earth can I find repose, nor can I feel or
   see aught beside. I am lost and beside myself; I am led captive and
   wounded nigh unto death, and wait only on thy providence, which will
   satisfy every one of my desires, which is in the order of salvation.

   The Lord. O Soul, my beloved, thou art seeking to know what thou canst
   not comprehend. Thy instinct and thy desire, so far as the natural man
   is concerned, are supernatural; but as concerning the spiritual, and
   the end for which thou wert created, they are natural, because love is
   thy beginning, thy middle, and ought to be thy end. Thou canst not
   live without love, for it is thy life, both in this world and in the
   other. It is for this reason that the desire consumed thee to know
   what love may be, but thou canst not comprehend it with the intellect,
   nor with the Spirit, nor with all the love thou mayest possess; even
   those who are in heaven, their home, know it only according to the
   measure of grace and charity they have had in this life.

   For love is God himself, who cannot be comprehended, except by the
   wonderful effects of the great love which he is ever manifesting, and
   which can neither be estimated nor imagined. And when I reveal to the
   Soul but one spark of my pure love, she is constrained to return me
   that love, whose power compels her to do her all for me, even, if need
   were, to suffer torture and a thousand deaths. How much love may be
   infused into the hearts of men, can be learned from what men have done
   for love of me. But I see, my beloved, that thou seekest not this
   operative love in its effects, but those gentle drops that I pour into
   the hearts of my elect, and which melt the Soul, the Spirit, and even
   the bodily powers, so that they act no longer. By these drops the Soul
   remains immersed in the sweetness of that love, and is incapable of
   performing any action: she is lost in herself and alienated from every
   creature: serene in the depths of her heart, at peace with all, and
   passive, she is absorbed with that love, which satisfies her, without
   nourishment; hence she exclaims in her ardor:

   Soul. O food without taste, O taste without flavor, O flavor without
   food, O food of love on which angels, saints, and men are nourished! O
   beatific food, he who tastes thee knows not what thou art! O real
   food, satisfying the appetite, thou dost destroy every other desire!
   He who enjoys this food esteems himself already blessed even in this
   life, where God communicates it but in the smallest measure: if he
   should bestow only a little more, man would die of that subtle,
   penetrating love, for the Spirit would be so inflamed that the weak
   body would perish. O celestial love! O divine love! thou hast sealed
   my lips: I know not how to speak, nor will I seek what never can be
   found. I am conquered and overpowered.

   That he whose heart is pure knows the love of God.--How that love
   works secretly, subtly, and without exterior occupation.--Some of its
   effects.--Exclamations of the Soul upon this love.--Of its properties.
   
   The Lord. O beloved Soul, knowest thou who it is that employs my love?
   He whose heart is pure and empty of every other love. When he has
   found it, he remains content and satisfied, although he knows not my
   mode of operation nor his own condition; because love works in secret
   and subtly, without external show.

   Such a one is continually occupied, yet without occupation; he is
   bound, yet knows not who holds him, he is in a prison without an
   outlet. The Soul can avail herself of neither her understanding, her
   memory, nor her will, and seems like a thing insensate, dumb, and
   blind, because the divine love has overpowered all the sensibilities
   of both Soul and Body. And therefore the Soul and Spirit, finding
   themselves so transformed from their wonted habit of loving and
   acting, and secretly and strongly swayed by a higher love, are
   constrained to ask: "O Lord, what manner of love is this? What is this
   love which is ever changing man from good to better, continually
   bringing him nearer to his end, and yet, as he approaches it more
   closely, plunges him into ever profounder ignorance of his situation?"

   Man in this state is kept alive by the rays of love with which God
   pierces his heart, and which return to heaven in ardent sighs. If he
   did not find this relief he would die through the vehemence of this
   fire. Sometimes it so restrains him that he can neither speak nor
   sigh, in order that its work may be more quickly done; but it does not
   hold him long in this condition, because he could not remain in it and
   live. Then the Soul, enlightened, inflamed with divine love, and
   filled with sweetness and delight, exclaims:

   Soul. O love, the Soul that feels thee, begins even in this world to
   possess eternal life; but thou, Lord, dost conceal this work even from
   its possessor, lest he should spoil it by making it his own. O love,
   he who feels thee understands thee not; he who desires to comprehend
   thee cannot know thee. O love, our life, our blessedness, our rest!
   Divine love brings with it every good and banishes every evil. O
   heart, wounded with divine love, thou art forever incurable, and dying
   of this sweet wound, thou dost enter upon never-ending life. O fire of
   love, what doest thou in man? Thou purifiest him as gold is purified
   by fire, and dost conduct him with thee to that country and that end
   for which he was created.

   Love is a divine flame: and as material fire ever burns and consumes,
   according to its nature, so in man the love of God is by its nature
   ever working toward its end, and for its part never ceases to benefit
   and serve him whom it holds so dear; he who does not know its power
   has but himself to blame, since God never tires of doing good to man
   while he is in this life, and has always the most tender love for him.

   O love, I can no longer be silent, and yet I cannot speak as I desire
   of thy sweet and gentle operation, for I am filled with love which
   inspires me with the wish to speak but deprives me of the power.
   Within myself I speak with the heart and with the mind, but when I
   would pronounce the words, something checks me, and I find myself
   betrayed by this poor tongue. I would be silent but I cannot, for
   still the instinct for speech urges me on. If I could utter that love
   of which my heart is full, I think that every other heart would be
   inflamed, however remote from love it might be. Before I leave this
   life I long to speak once of this love, to speak of it as I feel it
   within me, of its effects in me, and of what it requires of him into
   whom it is infused, and whom it fills to overflowing with a sweetness
   above all sweetness, and with an indescribable content, so great that
   for it one would willingly be burned alive; for God unites a certain
   zeal with this love, by the power of which man disregards all
   contradictions how great soever.

   O love, powerful and sweet, happy is he who is possessed by thee, for
   thou dost strengthen, defend, and preserve him from all ills of body
   and soul. Thou gently guidest all things to their end, and never dost
   abandon man. Thou art ever faithful, thou givest light against the
   deceite of the devil, the malice of the world, and against ourselves,
   who are so full of self and so perverse. This love is so illuminative
   and efficacious that it draws all imperfections from their secret
   caverns, that we may apply the remedy and purge ourselves from them.

   This love, which rules and governs our will, in order that it may grow
   strong and firm to resist temptation, so occupies the affections and
   the intellect that they desire naught beside. The memory is engrossed,
   and the powers of the soul are satisfied, so that love remains her
   sole possessor and inhabitant, and she allows nothing else to enter
   there. Love exhales a continual sweet perfume, by which man suffers
   himself to be allured, and so powerful is this fragrance that however
   great may be the torments through which he passes to salvation, there
   is no martyrdom he would not suffer gladly to attain it.

   O love, no words of mine can express the sweetness and delight with
   which thou fillest the heart; it remains enclosed within, and by
   speaking it is inflamed. Whoever hears or reads these words without
   the sentiment of love, makes little account of them, and they pass by
   him like the wind. But if I could express the joy, the pleasure, and
   the peace which it brings to the beloved heart, all men who hear or
   read these words would surrender without resistance. For it is so
   adapted to the human heart that at its first touch it opens wide its
   door, although man never can receive this celestial gift till he is
   free from every other love. If the heart receives but the smallest
   drop, it so earnestly desires to increase it that it rates as nothing
   all the goods of this world. With this love, man conquers the evil
   habits which are a hindrance to him, and in its strength he stands
   ever ready to perform great deeds.

   Other effects of love.--What it accomplishes at its will.--The work is
   all its own.--Of works wrought through love, in love, and by love,
   with some explanation of them. 

   O love, with thy sweetness thou breakest the heart that is harder than
   adamant, and meltest it like wax in the fire. O love, thou makest
   great men to esteem themselves as the least of the earth, and the
   richest as the poorest. O love, thou causest wise men to appear as
   fools, and thou takest their knowledge from the learned and givest
   them an understanding surpassing all other understanding. O love, thou
   banishest from the heart all melancholy, hardness, and natural
   inclinations, and all delight in worldly things. O love, thou makest
   bad men good, and artful men simple. Thou dost ingeniously deprive men
   of their free will, so that they are contented to be guided by thee
   alone, because thou art our guide.

   O love, thine operations are alien to this earth; and therefore thou
   changest man from earthly to celestial, and, depriving him of every
   human mode of operation, dost unfit him for all earthly occupations. O
   love, thou dost accomplish the whole work of our salvation, which we
   neither know how to do nor are able to do without thee. O love, thy
   name is so sweet that it imparts sweetness to all things. Sweet is the
   mouth that names thee, most of all when the words proceed from a heart
   full of thy liquid sweetness, which makes man benign, meek, gracious,
   joyous, bountiful, and ready, so far as may be, to serve all men. O
   love, when by any way thou art able to penetrate the heart of man with
   thy sweet and gracious darts, if it be unoccupied by any other love,
   however slight may be thy flame, it is powerful enough to make him
   abandon all things else for thee.

   This love makes every affliction and contradiction appear sweet. O
   love, what sweet quiet, and what quiet sweetness thou bringest with
   thee! As thou belongest to all, the more thou art diffused among
   creatures, so much the more fully is thy will accomplished; the more
   man feels and comprehends thy gentle warmth, the more he is inflamed
   with desire, and he neither asks for any proof beyond his own feeling,
   nor knows how to give any other reason for it: but love carries with
   it its own reason, and the will likewise, and remains lord of the
   whole man, subjecting him entirely to its will according to its
   pleasure, and this work is wholly its own; for then its operations are
   effected through love, in love, and by love.

   By works done through love, those works are understood which man
   performs through the love of God, when God gives him an instinctive
   desire to work for the benefit of himself or his neighbor; in this
   first state of love, God causes man to undertake many and various
   useful and necessary works, which he performs with a pious intention.
   The works of the second state of love are done in God; these are such
   as are done with no view either to the advantage of one's self or of
   one's neighbor, but rest in God, with no motive in him who does them.
   Here man perseveres in good works through the habits of virtue which
   he has formed, although God has deprived him of that share in them
   which gave him aid and pleasure. This work is more perfect than the
   other, for in that there were many motives which nourished both soul
   and body. The works done by love are more perfect than the other two,
   because man has no part whatever in them; love has so subdued and
   conquered him that he finds himself drowned in the sea of love, and
   knows not where he is, but is lost in himself and left without the
   power to act. In this case it is love itself which works in man, and
   its works are works of perfection, inasmuch as they are not wrought by
   human power, and are works of sanctifying grace, and God accepts them
   all.

   This sweet and pure love takes possession of man, absorbs him and
   deprives him of himself. It keeps possession of him and continually
   works within him, solely for his benefit and advantage, and without
   any thought or care on his part.

   O love, what a sweet companion and faithful guide art thou! Neither
   speech nor thought can do justice to thy excellence. Blessed is the
   heart possessed and occupied by thee. Love makes men just, simple,
   pure, rich, wise, and contented, and with its sweetness lessens every
   grief.

   O love, all that is done through thee is done with ease, with gladness
   and goodwill; and though the toil be great, thy sweetness tempers
   every trial. Oh, the torment of working without love! It is beyond
   belief. Love gives a sweet flavor to every viand. if it is bad it
   makes it good, and if good it makes it better. According to the grade
   and the capacity of the subject, God infuses love into the heart of
   man.

   Oh, how sweet a thing it would be to speak of this love, if fitting
   words were found to express the delight with which it fills the heart.
   But because the Soul is immortal, and capable of greater love than it
   can feel in this life, on account of the weakness of the body, which
   does not allow the Soul to support all that it desires, it remains
   ever craving, and in this life can never be fully satisfied.

   O love, thou fillest the heart, but thou art so great that it cannot
   contain thee; it remains filled but not satisfied: by the road of his
   heart thou takest possession of the entire man and permittest none but
   thyself to find entrance; with a strong bond thou bindest all the
   facilities of soul and body. O sweet servitude of love, which gives
   man freedom and contentment in this life, and eternal blessedness in
   the other!

   O love, thy bonds are so sweet and so strong that they bind angels and
   saints together, and so firm and close that they are never broken; men
   who are bound by this chain are so united that they have but one will
   and one aim, and all things among them are in common, both temporal
   and spiritual. In this union there is no difference between rich, and
   poor, between nation and nation; all contradiction is excluded, for by
   this love crooked things are made straight and difficulties
   reconciled.

   The Soul asks various questions of our Lord.--What the martyrs have
   suffered for this love.--That charity is the shortest and most secure
   road to salvation, and that without it the Soul would rather cast
   itself into a thousand hells than enter the presence of God. 

   O sweet Jesus, my Love, what has brought thee from heaven to earth?
   Love. What has caused thee to suffer such great and terrible torments,
   even unto death? Love. What has induced thee to give thyself as food
   to thy beloved Soul? Love. What moved thee to send us, what still
   continually moves thee to send us, the Holy Spirit for our support and
   guide? Love.

   Many other things can be said of thee. Through love thou didst appear
   in this world so poor, so abject, and so humiliated in the eyes of
   men, that thou wast not esteemed a God, but scarcely as a man. A
   servant, however faithful and loving, could not endure so much for his
   master, even were he to promise him heaven itself, because without
   that interior love which thou bestowest upon man he cannot patiently
   suffer any torment either of soul or body.

   But thou, Lord, hast brought from heaven the sweet manna, this
   delicious food, which has in itself such vigor that it gives strength
   for every trial: as we have witnessed frist in thee, our most sweet
   Master, and afterwards in thy saints. Oh, how much they have done and
   suffered in the strength of the love infused by thee into their
   hearts, and by which they were so inflamed and united to thee, that no
   torture could separate them from thee! For in the midst of their
   torments a zeal was kindled that increased with their sufferings, and
   by it they were kept from yielding to the most cruel martyrdoms that
   tyrants could invent. The spectators saw only the weakness of the
   body, but the sweet and powerful love which God infused into the
   heart, and which is so vital and strong that he who abandons himself
   to it can never be lost, was hidden from them.

   There is no briefer or securer way of salvation than this sweet
   nuptial robe of charity, which gives such confidence and vigor to the
   Soul that she enters the presence of God without misgiving. But if at
   death she is found destitute of charity, she is left in such an abject
   and wretched condition that she would seek the gloomiest and most
   wretched spot, rather than appear in the divine presence. For God, who
   is simple and pure, can receive into himself nothing but pure and
   simple love; and being a sea of love in which all the saints are
   plunged, it is impossible that even the slightest imperfection should
   enter therein: hence the Soul, naked of charity when she is separated
   from the body (aware of her condition), would cast herself into hell
   rather than approach so bright and pure a presence.

   O pure love! Every stain of evil, even the least, is a great hell to
   thee, and even, by reason of thy vehemence, mere cruel that that of
   the damned. None but those who have experienced thee can understand
   and believe this. This love of which I speak, although in itself
   infinite, can be described in its gracious and familiar action in the
   beloved Soul, even as if it were one with her.

   Our Lord questions the Soul concerning the love she feels and on what
   he has said to her.--The Soul responds according to her ability, but
   cannot express the intensity of her love.--She asks our Lord how the
   loving Soul can live on earth, and concerning her condition. 

   The Lord. What hast thou to say, O my Soul, of this sweet love, so
   dear to thee, which never leaves thee to thyself, is always speaking
   to thee comforting thee, inflaming thee, and revealing to thee some
   new and celestial beauty, that so thy affection for it may become more
   and more ardent? Tell me some of those loving words it speaks to thee
   when thou art with it alone.

   Soul. I find myself repeating certain words which are understood in
   the depths of my heart, which is glowing with an amorous flame. These
   words, and this sentiment of love, I do not understand and am unable
   to express, for they are unlike other words. Love opens my heart and
   is ever making such gracious communications to it that it is wholly
   inflamed and dissolved in love; yet in particular can discern neither
   words, flames, nor love; the heart is seized, possessed, and held fast
   by a loving satisfaction.

   Yet the Soul does not comprehend this work, although she perceives
   that in this visitation, love bestows all possible caresses upon the
   beloved Soul that a true lover can give when his affection is the
   greatest that can be conceived. This operation melts the Soul,
   detaches her from earth, purifies her, makes her simple, strengthens
   her, and draws her deeper and deeper into its loving flame. But she is
   not allowed to remain long in this great and penetrating fire, for
   humanity could not endure its vehemence; yet in the heart there
   remains always the impression that she is living in that love with
   God.

   O love! thou absorbest this heart into thyself and leavest Humanity
   deserted on the earth, where it finds no resting place. It appears an
   exiled creature, with no object either in heaven or in this world.

   O love, how burning and enamored is this Soul in which thou art
   performing such a work of love! I would that I knew how this creature
   lives upon the earth, both as to her body and her Soul, and how it is
   that she has her conversation as well with heaven as with creatures; I
   see her living a life very different from that of others, and one more
   for admiration than for edification. She sets no value upon anything:
   she appears like the mistress of heaven and the queen of earth,
   although she has nothing of her own; few can understand her; she is
   very free and fearless, and dreads not that anything can ever be
   wanting to her; she has nothing, and yet, to her seeming, all things
   are hers.

   The Lord. The answer is not for men, blind and deprived of celestial
   light, who having their intellects occupied with earthly things,
   cannot comprehend my words; yet, I will answer for those who, aided by
   the divine ray, will be able to understand it. My love so delights the
   Soul that it destroys every other joy which can be possessed by man
   here below. The taste of me extinguishes every other taste; my light
   blinds all who behold it; all the facilities of the Soul are so
   possessed and bound by love that she is lost and understands neither
   what she has done nor what she should do. She is raised above herself
   and bereft of reason, memory, and will.

   Creatures like these no longer take part in the things of this world,
   save through necessity, and then as if they knew them not. They are
   always occupied interiorly, and this prevents their being nourished by
   temporal things. God sends into their hearts rays and flames of love
   so subtle and penetrating that they know not where they are, but
   remain silently plunged in the serene depths of that love. And if God
   did not sometimes deprive them of this vehement love, the Soul could
   not remain in the body; yet, when he thus departs, he leaves the Soul
   so sweetly occupied in him that naught beside is seen, known, or
   understood. Rarely does she remember anything but what she has felt,
   and until the impression grows weaker it is impossible for her to
   think of her own affairs, however pressing they may be.

   Of the condition of the loving Soul.--How God delays imparting to her
   the knowledge of her defects, since she could not endure it.--She has
   no repose so long as she suspects the existence of any fault by which
   her Spirit is hindered of its satisfaction. 

   The state of the Soul is this: she is very sensitive, so that her mind
   cannot endure the least suspicion of defect, because pure love cannot
   remain where there is even the slightest fault, and the loving Soul,
   unable to endure it, would be thrown into intolerable pain. In this
   world man cannot be wholly free from imperfections, but at times God
   keeps him in ignorance of them, because he could not support the
   sight; at other times he reveals them all; and in this way man is
   purified.

   If a suspicion of sin falls upon this Soul, she cannot be pacified nor
   at rest until her mind is satisfied. The Soul which dwells in that
   amorous peace cannot be disturbed either by herself or by others; if
   any misunderstanding arises between herself and another, she is
   unquiet until she has done all in her power to remove it. And when
   souls habituated to divine love are, for any cause, permitted by God
   to be disturbed, for the time they are wretched at being cast out of
   the tranquil paradise in which they are accustomed to abide; and if
   God did not return them to their accustomed state it would be
   impossible for them to live. They live in great liberty and take
   little heed of earthly things. They are in a manner taken out of
   themselves, especially as they near the close of this life, of which
   they are stripped remaining immersed in that love into which the Soul
   has already found by long experience that God, by the operation of his
   gracious love, has taken both Soul and body, so that he allows them to
   want for nothing.

   God shows the Soul also, that all the benefits bestowed on her by
   creatures (whether spiritual or temporal) are given because God moves
   them to it; and hence she learns to take no heed of creatures, what
   service soever they may have rendered her, for she perceives clearly
   that it is God who has done it by the action of his providence. By
   this vision the Soul is more and more inflamed, and finally abandons
   herself to love, casting aside all creatures, and finding in God such
   fulness that she can regard nothing else but him.

   And although such a Soul may seem to have some affection for exterior
   things, do not believe it. It is impossible that any love should enter
   into hearts like these, except the love of God, unless God himself
   permits it by reason of some necessity either of the soul or the body.
   And should this occur, all love and care, coming from such a source,
   would be no impediment, and would not touch the depths of the heart;
   but would only be ordered of God for some necessity, because it is
   needful that pure love should be free from every exterior and interior
   concern; for, where the Spirit of God is, there is liberty.

   O that we could behold this sweet correspondence, and hear those
   burning words with their joyous vigor, where one can distinguish
   neither God nor man, but the heart remains in such a state that it
   seems a little paradise, given by God to souls that are dear to him,
   as a foretaste of that true and glorious paradise, but hidden from all
   except those lovers who are absorbed and lost in the ocean of divine
   love.

   O love! the heart which thou possessest becomes through peace of mind
   so great and so magnanimous, that it would rather suffer martyrdom to
   gain thee than without thee to be in possession of every other good in
   heaven or earth. Yet, this is beyond the comprehension of all who have
   not felt and tasted thee. A heart which finds itself in God sees all
   created things beneath itself, not through pride or conceit of self,
   but by reason of its union with God, which makes all that is God's
   appear to be its own, and beside him it sees, know, and comprehends
   nothing. A heart enamored of God is unconquerable, for God is its
   strength; hell does not affright it nor heaven allure it, for it is so
   disposed that it receives all that befalls as from the hand of God,
   remaining with him in immovable peace, and inwardly strengthened and
   fortified by him.

   Soul. O Love! how namest thou these beloved souls?

   The Lord. I have said, Ye are gods, and all children of the Most High
   (Psalm 81).

   Soul. O Love! thou annihilatest thy lovers in themselves, and then
   restorest them to a true and perfect liberty, and makest them masters
   of themselves. They wish nothing but what God wishes and finds all
   things else a grave impediment to them.

   O Love! I find no words to express thy benign and joyous sway, thy
   strong and assured freedom, thy sweet and gentle goodness: but all
   that thy true lover could express would be unequal to what he would
   desire to say. He seeks everywhere for loving words appropriate to
   that love, and finds them nowhere; for love and its effects are
   infinite, and the tongue is not only finite but very feeble, and is
   always dissatisfied and confused by its powerlessness to say what it
   desires. And although all that he says is as nothing, yet when man
   speaks of this love as he feels it in his heart, it relieves him that
   so he may not die of love. What sayest thou, my Lord, of this thy
   beloved Soul, who is so enamored of thee?

   The Lord. That she is wholly mine. And thou, my Soul, what sayest thou
   of thy heart?

   Soul. That I am wounded, O my God, with love, in which I live joyful
   and at peace.

   Of the condition of the Body, and in what suffering Humanity found
   itself, living as though dead.--How God provided for it.--Of the joy
   experienced by the Soul in the interchange of love, and how she is
   left like one dead when deprived of it. 

   As the state of a Soul enkindled and glowing with divine love has been
   explained, something now remains to be said of the condition of the
   body. The body cannot live on love, like the Soul, but it is nourished
   by material food. And as God has willed to separate the Soul from
   earthly things and from her body, and engage her wholly in spiritual
   operations, therefore it is left without vigor and almost without
   nourishment, for all communication having ceased between it and the
   Soul, without which it has no strength, it becomes like a Soul
   deprived of God, like one dead, without enjoyment, without vigor, and
   without aid or comfort. And if God should for a long time keep the
   Soul thus vehemently occupied within herself, it would be impossible
   in the nature of things for the body to survive.

   But God, who sees all things, provides for all necessities, and
   although, by reason of the union of the Soul with God, Humanity has
   little comfort, and can neither smile, nor relish food, nor sleep, nor
   take delight in the emotions of the Soul or the sensations of the
   body, nor in any earthly thing, yet God concedes it a sufficiency for
   the support of its wearisome life. And in order that every
   imperfection which exists in man may die in God (while man still lives
   upon the earth), God seems to open a vien and let out the blood of
   Humanity, the Soul meanwhile remaining as if in a bath, and when there
   is no more blood within the body, and the Soul is wholly transformed
   in God, then each goes to its own place, the Soul to her rest in God
   and the body to the grave; and this work is done in secret and by love
   alone. If you know how harassed and besieged is this poor Humanity,
   you would in truth believe that no creature suffers so greatly as
   itself; but because this is invisible it is neither credited nor
   understood, nor has any one compassion for it, especially as it is
   endured for the love of God. But I say (with all this for the love of
   God), it is necessary that this creature should live always as if
   dead, like a man hanging by his feet, who, notwithstanding, lives. And
   though it may be said, and truly, that the heart is contented, yet
   what enjoyment can the body have? Thus Humanity, no longer able to
   live according to its nature, appears to me to be always tortured and
   greatly afflicted. It lives, but knows not how it lives, nor on what
   food. It desires nothing, but remains in God, who pierces often this
   beloved heart with darts of love so keen that they almost destroy the
   body by the ardor of their penetrating and amorous flame, and absorbs
   the Soul in an obscure and hidden satisfaction from which she would
   never part, since in it she finds her own proper repose and natural
   beatitude, which God often reveals to the heart he loves.

   But the body, constrained to follow the Soul (without which it cannot
   live or do aught, not being Spirit), remains during this time as if
   without a Soul and without human comfort, in almost mortal weakness,
   and knows not how to aid itself. Therefore in this necessity it is
   assisted by others or secretly provided for by God himself, for
   otherwise this creature would be as helpless as a little child, who
   having no one to care for it, can do nothing but weep until its wants
   are supplied. It is not to be wondered at, therefore, that for
   creatures like this, God should provide particular persons to assist
   them, by whose means all their necessities both of Soul and body are
   supplied, for otherwise they would die. Behold how our Lord Jesus
   Christ left his beloved Mother to the special care of St. John; he did
   the same for his disciples, and does it still for other devout
   persons; in such a manner that one succors another both in spiritual
   and temporal things with this divine union. And because people in
   general do not understand these operations, and have no such union,
   therefore particular persons are needed for such cares, through whom
   God may operate by his grace and light.

   Those who behold such creatures and do not understand them, admire,
   rather than are edified by them; do not judge them, then, if you do
   not wish to err. But consider how besieged and how afflicted is this
   Humanity, living as if without life. She lives because God gives her
   the grace to live; but by nature her life would be impossible. When
   the Soul was able to give love for love, that love yielded Humanity a
   certain satisfaction which sustained it; but now, when the Soul is
   deprived of all sensible and active love, Humanity is left abandoned
   and forsaken, like one dead. But God performs another loving work, so
   secret and so subtle that the Soul becomes more noble and more perfect
   than before, by reason of the destitution and the nakedness in which
   God leaves her, so that without other support she rests, firm and
   stable, on him alone.

   How the Soul, the heart, and the Spirit of this creature are devoid of
   form, and employed in an occupation which cannot be known by their
   means.--That the heart becomes the tabernacle of God, into which he
   infuses many graces and consolations, which produce admirable
   fruits.--That few creatures are led by this road.--Of the nudity of
   the Spirit and of its union with God. 

   The Lord. What will you do, O Soul, thus naked and despoiled? What
   will you do, O heart and mind, which are both so empty? How is it with
   you in this state, before unknown to you?

   Soul. I know not where I am; I have lost will, understanding, memory,
   love, and all enjoyment; I can give no reason for myself, and am lost,
   and can neither place myself nor seek or find any other thing.

   The heart and the mind of this creature being deprived of all the ways
   by means of which heaven seemed to make an entrance, now exclaim: We
   are absorbed in an operation too subtle and secret to be made known by
   us, but in that occupation a loving and ethereal spirit is hidden and
   restrained which fills the whole man so entirely, that Soul, heart,
   mind, and body, every bone and nerve and vein, are overflowing with
   it, so that all are absorbed with such a secret and concentrated
   force, that every sigh struggling from the heart is felt interiorly as
   a vehement flame. But the body, unable to endure the action of so
   powerful a flame, grieves, yet finds no words to express its grief;
   the mouth is filled with burning sighs and amorous conceits, which
   rise from the heart, and seem ready to break forth in words powerful
   enough to break a heart of stone. But they find no utterance; the true
   and loving colloquy is going on within, and its sweetness cannot be
   conceived. The heart is made the tabernacle of God, into which, by
   himself and also by others, many graces are infused, which bear in
   secret wondrous fruits. This creature has a heaven within herself.

   If such as she (and they are rare in this world) were understood, they
   would be adored upon earth; but God hides them from themselves and
   from all others until the hour of death, at which time the true and
   false are made known. Oh, how few creatures are conducted by this road
   of secret and penetrating love, which keeps both Soul and body in such
   subjection that it leaves no imperfection in them, for pure love can
   comport with none, however slight; and it perseveres in its sweet
   action in the Soul until it purifies her entirely, so that she can
   reach her proper end without passing through purgatory.

   O Soul, O mind, bound and imprisoned in that divine flame! who could
   comprehend that beauty, that wisdom, that amorous care wrought in you
   by divine love and for love--those colloquies so sweet, so loving, and
   so gracious--and not feel his heart melt within him, though it were
   harder than a stone.

   O love! thou art called love until all that love is perfected which
   God has infused into the heart of man, in which he rests inebriated
   and immersed until he knows no longer what love is; for then it
   becomes Spirit and unites with the Spirit of man, so that he becomes
   spiritual. And the Spirit, being invisible and inscrutable to all the
   powers of the Soul, man is conquered and subdued, and knows no longer
   where he is, where he should be, nor whither he should go. But by
   reason of this secret and intimate union with God, there remains in
   the Soul a sweet impression, so firm and assured a satisfaction, that
   no torture, however cruel, could overpower it, and a zeal so ardent
   that a man, had he a thousand lives, would risk them all for that
   hidden consciousness which is so strong that hell itself could not
   destroy it. O Spirit, naked and invisible, none is able to lay hold of
   thee, by reason of thy nakedness! Thy habitation is in heaven, albeit
   with thy body thou yet remainest on the earth. Thou knowest not
   thyself, nor art thou known by others in this world. All thy lovers
   and thy kindred who are in heaven are known to thee only by virtue of
   an interior instinct implanted within thee by the Spirit of God.

   O that I could find words fitting to describe that gracious friendship
   and that vanished union. Vanished, I say, because so far as man is
   concerned he has lost completely all expressions, that is, of love,
   union, annihilation, transformation, sweetness, softness, goodness;
   has lost, in short, all forms of speech by means of which the absolute
   union of two separate things could be expressed and comprehended,
   where nothing remains but one pure Spirit, active, and simple, and
   incomprehensible.

   Of the secret means used by God for the purification of man.--Of the
   loving care he takes of him.--How he sweetly leads him by love, and
   does not allow him to work for his own advantage.--That true nakedness
   of spirit cannot be expressed by words. 

   O sweetest, my Lord, in how many hidden ways thou workest in man when
   thou desirest to purify him by means of thy most pure love, which
   removes all rust from the Soul and prepares it for the most holy union
   with thee! Oh, vast and happy country, unknown to wretched mortals,
   but for which they were created by God!

   O infinite God, how is it possible that thou shouldst not be known and
   loved by him whom thou hast made capable of knowing and enjoying thee,
   unless solely by reason of the little taste and feeling which by thy
   grace thou hast bestowed upon him! For, if in this world man possessed
   thee, he would leave all things beside.

   O Lord, what loving care thou takest, day and night, of man, who
   knoweth not himself, and much less knoweth thee, although thou lovest
   him so much, seekest him with such diligence, and waitest for and
   bearest him with so much patience, out of thy divine love!

   Thou art that great most high God of whom we can neither speak nor
   think, because of the ineffable supereminence of thy glory, wisdom,
   power, and infinite goodness: and all these thou employest in the
   service of man, who is so vile, but whom thou wouldst make so great
   and worthy; and therefore thou art ever luring him with thy love
   because thou art unwilling to force the free-will which thou hast
   given him. Thou drawest him to thee by love, and desirest that he
   consent to thee through love. Thou workest in him by love and with thy
   love. Thou wouldst have the whole man act through love, that so,
   without thy love he might do nothing. Thou, who art our God and Lord,
   hast disregarded thine own ease, both of soul and body, that thou
   mightest save man; and thou willest that he also should disregard all
   ease of soul and body that he may do thy will: and this chiefly
   because thy will is our best good: but this, by blind and miserable
   man is never understood.

   I have not spoken well of the nakedness of the Spirit. It is because
   there are no words by which this nakedness might be expressed, and the
   soul which finds herself in that condition has in her mind a fulness,
   a repletion, of which she knows not how to speak: and yet by reason of
   the vehemence of her emotions she is forced to speak, and in a
   language more fitting than she is aware. This language is like the
   ink, black and unseemly, and yet by its means many thoughts are made
   plain which could not otherwise be understood.

   Alas! if man could comprehend what it is that the mind feels in such a
   state, these words would indeed appear to him dark and unseemly. What,
   then, are these hearts and tongues to do which cannot utter their
   thoughts? So secret and hidden are they that to him who feels them it
   seems impossible that he should find any who can understand, and much
   less express them. Will he then remain silent wonder? No, for he is
   unable to be silent, finding his heart ever more inflamed by the
   marvelous operations of divine love, which God increased day by day
   within him, and which bind him so closely by the invisible chains of
   love that Humanity can hardly endure it, more especially when it sees
   the madness of men, who are so wrapped in exterior things that they
   neither know, conjecture, nor comprehend this divine operation. But
   God loves us so much that although he sees us so blind and deaf to our
   own advantage, yet he does not for that reason cease to knock
   continually at our hearts by his holy inspirations, that so he may
   enter and make therein tabernacles for himself into which creatures
   can never enter more.

   Exclamations of the Soul upon the blindness which creatures offer to
   the love of God.--Of the secret operations of God in man, arousing and
   admonishing him with love.--The Soul inquires concerning this work,
   and desires to know what grace is, and what is the ray of love. 

   Alas! how few and rare are they in whom God abides by these
   operations! O God, thou retainest thy love within thyself because thou
   canst not infuse it into creatures so occupied with earthly affairs.

   O earth, earth, what wilt thou do with those whom thou dost so absorb?
   The Soul lost and the body corrupted, all things are lost in infinite
   and incredible torments. Reflect upon this, O Soul! Reflect, and no
   longer lose the time and the power which are now given thee to escape
   all danger; thy God is now gracious and propitious to thee. He is very
   anxious for thy salvation, and is ever seeking and calling thee with
   measureless love. The operations which God is continually working on
   our behalf are so many and great, that they can neither be recounted
   nor imagined: but all the good which he has done to us, is still
   doing, will do, and desires to do, will result in our condemnation and
   our confusion if we fail to cooperate with him in the time which we so
   undervalue.

   Soul. Show me, O my Lord, if it please thee, how thou dost work within
   man by thy secret love, in which he is taken captive by thee, not
   knowing how, nor understanding in what manner, but only finding
   himself a prisoner of love and greatly satisfied.

   The Lord. I move with my love the heart of man, and with that movement
   give him light by which he sees that I am inspiring him to well-doing;
   and in that light he ceases to do ill, and struggles with his evil
   inclinations.

   Soul. What is this movement, and how does it begin in man, who knows
   not of its existence and asks not for it?

   The Lord. The pure, simple, and boundless love which I bear toward all
   men, impels me to grant him this grace, to knock at his heart, to see
   whether he will open and give me entrance, that so I may make my abode
   there and banish all things else.

   Soul. And what is this grace?

   The Lord. It is an inspiration which I send him by means of a ray of
   love, with which I give him also the instinct of love; it is
   impossible for him not to love, and although he knows not what he
   loves, yet he learns it by little and little.

   Soul. What is the ray of love?

   The Lord. Behold the rays of the sun, which are so subtle and
   penetrating that human eyes cannot behold them without losing their
   sight; such are the rays of my love which I send into human hearts,
   and which deprive man of all knowledge and all delight in worldly
   things.

   Soul. And these rays, how do they enter into the hearts of men?

   The Lord. Like darts directed at this one and at that; they touch the
   heart in secret, inflame it, and make it heave with sighs; man knows
   not what he wishes, but finding himself wounded with love can give no
   account of his condition, and remains lost in wonder.

   Soul. And what is this dart?

   The Lord. It is a scintillation of love which I infuse into man, which
   softens his obduracy and melts him as wax is melted by the fire. I
   give him also the instinct to refer to me all the love which I infuse.

   Soul. And what is this scintillation?

   The Lord. It is an inspiration sent by me which sets on fire the human
   heart, and so ardently and powerfully inflames it, that it can do
   nothing but love. By its power man is kept constantly intent on me,
   and is continually admonished by it within his heart.

   What this interior inspiration is, which works so secretly, cannot be
   told in words. Ask of the heart which feels it. Ask of the intellect
   which understands it. Ask of the mind filled with the operations which
   God effects by means of it, for the least conception that can be
   formed of it is that given by the tongue. God fills man with love; he
   draws him to himself by love, and by its force enables him to overcome
   the world, the devils, and himself; but man cannot understand this
   love nor put it into words.

   That love cannot be comprehended, and that the heart filled with it
   lives content.--Of the great mercy which God shows man in this
   life.--That his justice becomes apparent at the moment when the Soul
   leaves the body and passes to its destined place.--That the Soul can
   find repose in God only. 

   O my heart, what sayest thou of this love? What kindest thou? I say:
   My words are an interior jubilee, but they have no appropriate
   utterance. Neither by exterior signs, nor yet by sufferings (although
   endured for the love of God), can this love be made comprehensible; he
   only who has felt it can somewhat understand it. All that can be said
   of love is nothing, for the further one advances, the less he knows;
   but the heart, filled and satisfied, seeks and desires naught else but
   what it feels. All his words are heartfelt, glowing, and delightful,
   and so penetrating and in such subtle harmony with that which inspires
   them, that they can be comprehended only by those whose hearts are
   also united with God. God only comprehends them fully; the heart feels
   but understands not, and the work is that of God alone, while the
   benefit belongs to man. But the intimate, amorous relation which God
   sustains with the heart of man is a secret between him and the heart.

   The Lord. O Soul, what hast thou to say touching this operation?

   Soul. I find my will so strong and my liberty so vivid and so great,
   that I fear no impediments between me and my object, and in it I rest
   content. My intellect is greatly enlightened and daily becomes more
   calm; daily are manifested to it things so new and processes so
   delightful, that it is satisfied to remain ever thus employed, and
   seek no further since here it finds its rest; but it is impossible for
   it to explain these operations. The memory is satisfied to be employed
   in spiritual things, and can with difficulty recall any others. The
   affections which are natural to man are overshadowed by a supernatural
   love, which alone satisfied him, and makes him desire no other food,
   since in it he finds all that he requires. And yet man can render no
   account of the way in which he is conquered by an operation surpassing
   all his powers.

   What more shall I say concerning this work of love? I am forced to
   silence, yet have an instinctive wish to speak, although I cannot
   speak as I desire. Let him who wishes to experience these things
   abstain, as St. Paul commands, from every appearance of evil. Whenever
   man does this, at once God infuses into his soul some gift of grace,
   which he increases with so much love that the man is lost, absorbed,
   transformed, and overpowered. And however difficult it may appear to
   abstain from evil, no one would allow any hindrance to prevent him
   from doing everything for God, who could see the readiness with which
   he comes to the help of man, and the loving and watchful care with
   which he aids him and defends him from his adversaries. But when man
   has once entered the straight road, he learns that is is God who works
   all that is good in us, by his gracious inspirations and the love
   infused into the Soul, which acts without hindrance by reason of the
   satisfaction which God mingles with lll her toils. It is enough for
   man not to act in contradiction to his conscience, for God inspires
   all the good he would have us do, and gives the instinct and the
   strength for it, otherwise man could do no good thing. For this God
   gives all the facilities and the means, so that he enables us to do
   all things with pleasure, even those that to others seem the greatest
   penances.

   O how great is the love, the kindness, and the mercy which God shows
   to man in this wretched world! Justice is made known afterwards at the
   moment when the soul leaves the body; then, if she has not to undergo
   purgation, God receives her into himself, where she is transformed by
   his burning love, and thus transformed remains in him forever. At that
   moment also she goes to purgatory or to hell, if there is aught within
   her to be purged or to be punished: this is accomplished by the divine
   decree which sends each one to his own place. Every one carries within
   himself his own sentence, and is by himself condemned. If souls did
   not then find the places ordained for them by God, their torments
   would be even greater, for they would have violated the divine order;
   and as there is no place which his mercy does not visit, when they are
   within his order, their sufferings are less than they would otherwise
   be. The soul was created by God for himself, and is governed by him,
   and it can find no repose but in him alone. The condemned in hell are
   in the order of God through justice. Could they be outside of it they
   would be in a still greater hell by their violation of the divine
   order, which gives them the terrible instinct to go directly to their
   appointed place. Elsewhere their sufferings would be redoubled, and
   therefore they go thither, not indeed that they may suffer less, but
   impelled by that supreme and infallible decree of God, which cannot
   err.

   The divine fire which St. Catherine experienced in herself, made her
   comprehend the state of souls in purgatory, and that they are
   contented there although in torment. 

   The state of souls in purgatory.--They are exempt from all self-love. 

   This holy soul, while still in the flesh, was placed in the purgatory
   of the burning love of God, in whose flames she was purified from
   every stain, so that when she passed from this life she might be ready
   to enter the presence of God, her most sweet love. By means of that
   flame of love she comprehended in her own soul the condition of the
   souls of the faithful in purgatory, where they are purified from the
   rust and stain of sins, from which they have not been cleansed in this
   world. And as in the purgatory of that divine flame she was united
   with the divine love and satisfied with all that was accomplished in
   her, she was enabled to comprehend the state of the souls in
   purgatory, and thus discovered concerning it:

   "As far as I can see, the souls in purgatory can have no choice but to
   be there; this God has most justly ordained by his divine decree. They
   cannot turn towards themselves and say: `I have committed such and
   such sins for which I deserve to remain here;' nor can they say:
   `Would that I had refrained from them, for then I should at this
   moment be in paradise;' nor again: `This soul will be released before
   me;' or `I shall be released before her.' They retain no memory of
   either good or evil respecting themselves or others which would
   increase their pain. They are so contented with the divine
   dispositions in their regard; and with doing all that is pleasing to
   God in that way which he chooses, that they cannot think of
   themselves, though they may strive to do so. They see nothing but the
   operation of the divine goodness which is so manifestly bringing them
   to God that they can reflect neither on their own profit nor on their
   hurt. Could they do so, they would not be in pure charity. They see
   not that they suffer their pains in consequence of their sins, nor can
   they for a moment entertain that thought, for should they do so it
   would be an active imperfection, and that cannot exist in a state
   where there is no longer the possibility of sin. At the moment of
   leaving this life they see why they are sent to purgatory, but never
   again, otherwise they would still retain something private, which has
   no place there. Being established in charity, they can never deviate
   therefrom by any defect, and have no will or desire, save the pure
   will of pure love, and can swerve from it in nothing. They can neither
   commit sin, nor merit by refraining from it.

   The joy of souls in purgatory.--The saint illustrates their ever
   increasing vision of God.--The difficulty of speaking about their
   state. 

   "There is no peace to be compared with that of the souls in purgatory,
   save that of the saints in paradise, and this peace is ever augmented
   by the inflowing of God into these souls, which increases in
   proportion as the impediments to it are removed. The rust of sin is
   the impediment, and this the fire continually consumes, so that the
   soul in this state is continually opening itself to admit the divine
   communication. As a covered surface can never reflect the sun, not
   through any defect in that orb, but simply from the resistance offered
   by the covering, so, if the covering be gradually removed, the surface
   will by little and little be opened to the sun and will more and more
   reflect his light.

   "So it is with the rust of sin, which is the covering of the soul. In
   purgatory the flames incessantly consume it, and as it disappears, the
   soul reflects more and more perfectly the true sun who is God. Its
   contentment increases as this rust wears away, and the soul is laid
   bare to the divine ray, and thus one increases and the other decreases
   until the time is accomplished. The pain never diminishes, although
   the time does, but as to the will, so united is it to God by pure
   charity, and so satisfied to be under his divine appointment, that
   these souls can never say their pains are pains.

   "On the other hand, it is true that they suffer torments which no
   tongue can describe nor any intelligence comprehend, unless it be
   revealed by such a special grace as that which God has vouchsafed to
   me, but which I am unable to explain. And this vision which God
   revealed to me has never departed from my memory. I will describe it
   as far as I am able, and they whose intellects our Lord will deign to
   open will understand me.

   Separation from God is the greatest pain of purgatory.--In this,
   purgatory differs from hell. 

   "The source of all suffering is either original or actual sin. God
   created the soul pure, simple, free from every stain, and with a
   certain beatific instinct toward himself. It is drawn aside from aim
   by original sin, and when actual sin is afterwards added, this
   withdraws it still farther, and ever as it removes from him its
   sinfulness increases because its communication with God grows less and
   less.

   "And because there is no good except by participation with God, who,
   to the irrational creatures imparts himself as he wills and in
   accordance with his divine decree, and never withdraws from them, but
   to the rational soul he imparts himself more or less, according as he
   finds her more or less freed from the hindrances of sin, it follows
   that, when he finds a soul that is returning to the purity and
   simplicity in which she was created, he increased in her the beatific
   instinct, and kindles in her a fire of charity so powerful and
   vehement, that it is insupportable to the soul to find any obstacle
   between her and her end; and the clearer vision she has of these
   obstacles the greater is her pain.

   "Since the souls in purgatory are freed from the guilt of sin, there
   is no barrier between them and God save only the pains they suffer,
   which delay the satisfaction of their desire. And when they see how
   serious is even the slightest hindrance, which the necessity of
   justice causes to check them, a vehement flame kindles within them,
   which is like that of hell. They feel no guilt however, and it is
   guilt which is the cause of the malignant will of the condemned in
   hell, to whom God does not communicate his goodness, and thus they
   remain in despair and with a will forever opposed to the good will of
   God.

   The difference between the state of the souls in hell and that of
   those in purgatory.--Reflections of the saint upon those who neglect
   their salvation. 

   "It is evident that the revolt of man's will from that of God
   constitutes sin, and while that revolt continues, man's guilt remains.
   Those, therefore, that are in hell, having passed from this life with
   perverse wills, their guilt is not remitted, nor can it be, since they
   are no longer capable of change. When this life is ended, the soul
   remains forever confirmed either in good or evil according as she has
   here determined. As it is written: Where I shall find thee, that is,
   at the hour of death, with the will either fixed on sin or repenting
   of it, there I will judge thee. From this judgment there is no appeal,
   for after death the freedom of the will can never return, but the will
   is confirmed in that state in which it is found at death. The souls in
   hell, having been found at that hour with the will to sin, have the
   guilt and the punishment always with them, and although this
   punishment is not so great as they deserve, yet it is eternal. Those
   in purgatory, on the other hand, suffer the penalty only, for their
   guilt was cancelled at death, when they were found hating their sins
   and penitent for having offended the divine goodness. And this penalty
   has an end, for the term of it is ever approaching. O misery beyond
   all misery, and the greater because in his blindness man regards it
   not!

   "The punishment of the damned is not, it is true, infinite in degree,
   for the all lovely goodness of God shines even into hell. He who dies
   in mortal sin merits infinite woe for an infinite duration; but the
   mercy of God has made the time only infinite, and mitigated the
   intensity of the pain. In justice he might have inflicted much greater
   punishment than he has done.

   "Oh, what peril attaches to sin willfully committed! For it is so
   difficult for man to bring himself to penance, and without penitence
   guilt remains and will ever remain, so long as man retains unchanged
   the will to sin, or is intent upon committing it.


   "The souls in purgatory are entirely conformed to the will of God;
   therefore, they correspond with his goodness, are contented with all
   that he ordains, and are entirely purified from the guilt of their
   sins. They are pure from sins, because they have in this life abhorred
   them and confessed them with true contrition, and for this reason God
   remits their guilt, so that only the stains of sin remain, and these
   must be devoured by the fire. Thus freed from guilt and united to the
   will of God, they see him clearly according to that degree of light
   which he allows them, and comprehend how great a good is the fruition
   of God, for which all souls were created. Moreover, these souls are in
   such close conformity to God, and are drawn so powerfully toward him
   by reason of the natural attraction between him and the soul, that no
   illustration or comparison could make this impetuosity understood in
   the way in which my spirit conceives it by its interior sense.
   Nevertheless I will use one which occurs to me.

   A comparison to express with how great violence of love the souls in
   purgatory desire to enjoy God. 

   "Let us suppose that in the whole world there were but one loaf to
   appease the hunger of every creature, and that the bare sight of it
   would satisfy them. Now man, when in health, has by nature the
   instinct for food, but if we can suppose him to abstain from it and
   neither die nor yet lose health and strength, his hunger would clearly
   become increasingly urgent. In this case, if he knew that nothing but
   the loaf would satisfy him, and that until he reached it his hunger
   could not be appeased, he would suffer intolerable pains, which would
   increase as his distance from the loaf diminished; but if he were sure
   that he would never see it, his hell would be as complete as that of
   the damned souls, who, hungering after God, have no hope of ever
   seeing the bread of life. But the souls in purgatory have an assured
   hope of seeing him and of being entirely satisfied; and therefore they
   endure all hunger and suffer all pain until that moment when they
   enter into eternal possession of this bread, which is Jesus Christ,
   our Lord, our Saviour, and our Love.

   Of the marvelous wisdom of God in the creation of purgatory and of
   hell. 

   "As the purified spirit finds no repose but in God, for whom it was
   created, so the soul in sin can rest nowhere but in hell, which by,
   reason of its sins, has become its end. Therefore, at that instant in
   which the soul separates from the body, it goes to its prescribed
   place, needing no other guide than the nature of the sin itself, if
   the soul has parted from the body in mortal sin. And if the soul were
   hindered from obeying that decree (proceeding from the justice of
   God), it would find itself in a yet deeper hell, for it would be
   outside of the divine order, in which mercy always finds place and
   prevents the full infliction of all the pains the soul has merited.
   Finding, therefore, no spot more fitting, nor any in which her pains
   would be so slight, she casts herself into her appointed place.

   "The same thing is true of purgatory: the soul, leaving the body, and
   not finding in herself that purity in which she was created, and
   seeing also the hindrances which prevent her union with God, conscious
   also that purgatory only can remove them, casts herself quickly and
   willingly therein. And if she did not find the means ordained for her
   purification, she would instantly create for herself a hell worse than
   purgatory, seeing that by reason of this impediment she is hindered
   from approaching her end, which is God; and this is so great an ill
   that in comparison with it the soul esteems purgatory as nothing. True
   it is, as I have said, like hell; and yet, in comparison with the loss
   of God it is as nothing.


   Of the necessity of purgatory, and of its terrific character 

   "I will say furthermore: I see that as far as God is concerned,
   paradise has no gates, but he who will may enter. For God is all
   mercy, and his open arms are ever extended to receive us into his
   glory. But I see that the divine essence is so pure--purer than the
   imagination can conceive--that the soul, finding in itself the
   slightest imperfection, would rather cast itself into a thousand hells
   than appear, so stained, in the presence of the divine majesty.
   Knowing, then, that purgatory was intended for her cleaning, she
   throws herself therein, and finds there that great mercy, the removal
   of her stains.

   "The great importance of purgatory, neither mind can conceive nor
   tongue describe. I see only that its pains are as great as those of
   hell; and yet I see that a soul, stained with the slightest fault,
   receiving this mercy, counts its pains as naught in comparison with
   this hindrance to her love. And I know that the greatest misery of the
   souls in purgatory is to behold in themselves aught that displeases
   God, and to discover that, in spite of his goodness, they had
   consented to it. And this is because, being in the state of grace,
   they see the reality and the importance of the impediments which
   hinder their approach to God.

   How God and the soul reciprocally regard each other in purgatory.--The
   saint confesses that she has no words to express these things. 

   "All these things that I have said, in comparison with those which
   have been represented to my mind (as far as I have been able to
   comprehend them in this life), are of such magnitude that every idea,
   every word, every feeling, every imagination, all the justice and all
   the truth that can be said of them, seem false and worthless, and I
   remain confounded at the impossibility of finding words to describe
   them.

   "I behold such a great conformity between God and the soul, that when
   he finds her pure as when his divine majesty first created her he
   gives her an attractive force of ardent love which would annihilate
   her if she were not immortal. He so transforms her into himself that,
   forgetting all, she no longer sees aught beside him; and he continues
   to draw her toward him, inflames her with love, and never leaves her
   until he has brought her to that state from whence she first came
   forth, that is, to the perfect purity in which she was created.

   "When the soul beholds within herself the amorous flame by which she
   is drawn toward her sweet Master and her God, the burning heat of love
   overpowers her and she melts. Then, in that divine light she sees how
   God, by his great care and constant providence, never ceases to
   attract her to her last perfection, and that he does so through pure
   love alone. She sees, too, that she herself, clogged by sin, cannot
   follow that attraction toward God, that is, that reconciling glance
   which he casts upon her that he may draw her to himself. Moreover, a
   comprehension of that great misery, which it is to be hindered from
   gazing upon the light of God, is added to the instinctive desire of
   the soul to be wholly free to yield herself to that unifying flame. I
   repeat, it is the view of all these things which causes the pain of
   the suffering souls in purgatory, not that they esteem their pains as
   great (cruel thought they be), but they count as far worse that
   opposition which they find in themselves to the will of that God whom
   they behold burning for them with so ardent and so pure a love.

   "This love, with its unifying regard, is ever drawing these souls, as
   if it had no other thing to do; and when the soul beholds this, if she
   could find a yet more painful purgatory in which she could be more
   quickly cleansed, she would plunge at once therein, impelled by the
   burning, mutual love between herself and God.

   How God makes use of purgatory to complete the purification of the
   soul.--That she acquires therein a purity so great that if she were
   yet to remain after her purification she would cease to suffer. 

   "From that furnace of divine love I see rays of fire dart like burning
   lamps towards the soul; and so violent and powerful are they that both
   soul and body would be utterly destroyed, if that were possible. These
   rays perform a double office; they purify and they annihilate.

   "Consider gold: the oftener it is melted, the more pure does it
   become; continue to melt it and every imperfection is destroyed. This
   is the effect of fire on all materials. The soul, however, cannot be
   annihilated in God, but in herself she can, and the longer her
   purification lasts, the more perfectly does she die to herself, until
   at length she remains purified in God.

   "When gold has been completely freed from dross, no fire, however
   great, has any further action on it, for nothing but its imperfections
   can be consumed. So it is with the divine fire in the soul. God
   retains her in these flames until every stain is burned away, and she
   is brought to the highest perfection of which she is capable, each
   soul in her own degree. And when this is accomplished, she rests
   wholly in God. Nothing of herself remains, and God is her entire
   being. When he has thus led her to himself and purified her, she is no
   longer passable, for nothing remains to be consumed. If when thus
   refined she should again approach the fire she would feel no pain, for
   to her it has become the fire of divine love, which is life eternal
   and which nothing mars.

   The desire of souls in purgatory to be purified from every stain of
   sin.--The wisdom of God in veiling from them their defects. 

   "At her creation the soul received all the means of attaining
   perfection of which her nature was capable, in order that she might
   conform to the will of God and keep herself from contracting any
   stain; but being directly contaminated by original sin she loses her
   gifts and graces and even her life. Nor can she be regenerated save by
   the help of God, for even after baptism her inclination to evil
   remains, which, if she does not resist it, disposes and leads her to
   mortal sin, through which she dies anew.

   "God again restores her by a further special grace; yet, she is still
   so sullied and so bent on herself, that to restore her to her
   primitive innocence, all those divine operations which I have
   described are needful, and without them she could never be restored.
   When the soul has reentered the path which leads to her first estate,
   she is inflamed with so burning a desire to be transformed into God,
   that in it she finds her purgatory. Not, indeed, that she regards her
   purgatory as being such, but this desire, so fiery and so powerfully
   repressed, becomes her purgatory.

   "This final act of love accomplishes its work alone, finding the soul
   with so many hidden imperfections, that the mere sight of them, were
   it presented to her, would drive her to despair. This last operation,
   however, consumes them all, and when they are destroyed God makes them
   known to the soul to make her understand the divine action by which
   her purity was restored.

   How joy and suffering are united in purgatory 

   "That which man judges to be perfect, in the sight of God is defect.
   For all the works of man, which appear faultless when he considers
   them feels, remembers, wills and understands them, are, if he does not
   refer them to God, corrupt and sinful. For, to the perfection of our
   works it is necessary that they be wrought in us but not of us. In the
   works of God it is he that is the prime mover, and not man.

   "These works, which God effects in the soul by himself alone, which
   are the last operations of pure and simple love in which we have no
   merit, so pierce and inflame the soul that the body which envelops her
   seems to be hiding a fire, or like one in a furnace, who can find no
   rest but death. It is true that the divine love which overwhelms the
   soul gives, as I think, a peace greater than can be expressed; yet
   this peace does not in the least diminish her pains, nay, it is love
   delayed which occasions them, and they are greater in proportion to
   the perfection of the love of which God has made her capable.

   "Thus have these souls in purgatory great pleasure and great pain; nor
   does the one impede the other.

   The souls in purgatory are not in a state to merit.--How they regard
   the suffrages offered for them in this world. 

   "If by repentance the souls in purgatory could purify themselves, a
   moment would suffice to cancel their whole debt, so overwhelming would
   be the force of the contrition produced by the clear vision they have
   of the magnitude of every obstacle which hinders them from God, their
   love and their final end.

   "And, know for certain that not one farthing of their debt is remitted
   to these souls. This is the decree of divine justice; it is thus that
   God wills. But, on the other hand, these souls have no longer any will
   apart from that of God, and can neither see nor desire aught but by
   his appointment.

   "And if pious offerings be made for them by persons in this world,
   they cannot now note them with satisfaction, unless, indeed, in
   reference to the will of God and the balance of his justice, leaving
   to him the ordering of the whole, who repays himself as best pleases
   his infinite goodness. Could they regard these alms apart from the
   divine will concerning them, this would be a return to self, which
   would shut from their view the will of God, and that would be to them
   like hell. Therefore they are unmoved by whatever God gives them,
   whether it be pleasure or pain, nor can they ever again revert to
   self.


   "So hidden and transformed in God are they, that they rest content
   with all his holy will. And if a soul, retaining the slightest stain,
   were to draw near to God in the beatific vision, it would be to her a
   more grievous injury, and inflict more suffering, than purgatory
   itself. Nor could God himself, who is pure goodness and supreme
   justice, and the sight of God, not yet entirely satisfied (so long as
   the least possible purification remained to be accomplished) would be
   intolerable to her, and she would cast herself into the deepest hell
   rather than stand before him and be still impure."

   Reproaches of the soul in purgatory to persons in this world 

   And thus this blessed Soul, illuminated by the divine ray, said:
   "Would that I could utter so strong a cry that it would strike all men
   with terror, and say to them: O wretched beings! why are you so
   blinded by this world that you make, as you will find at the hour of
   death, no provision for the great necessity that will then come upon
   you?

   "You shelter yourselves beneath your hope in the mercy of God, which
   you unceasingly exalt, not seeing that it is your resistance to his
   great goodness which will be your condemnation. His goodness should
   constrain you to his will, not encourage you to persevere in your own.
   Since his justice is unfailing it must needs be in some way fully
   satisfied.

   "Have not the boldness to say: `I will go to confession and gain a
   plenary indulgence and thus I shall be saved.' Remember that the full
   confession and entire contrition which are requisite to gain a plenary
   indulgence are not easily attained. Did you know how hardly they are
   come by, you would tremble with fear and be more sure of losing than
   of gaining them.

   Showing that the sufferings of the souls in purgatory do not prevent
   their peace and joy. 

   "I see that the souls in purgatory behold a double operation. The
   first is that of the mercy of God; for while they suffer their
   torments willingly, they perceive that God has been very good to them,
   considering what they have deserved and how great are their offences
   in his eyes. For if his goodness did not temper justice with mercy
   (satisfying it with the precious blood of Jesus Christ), one sin alone
   would deserve a thousand hells. They suffer their pains so willingly
   that they would not lighten them in the least, knowing how justly they
   have been deserved. They resist the will of God no more than if they
   had already entered upon eternal life.

   "The other operation is that satisfaction they experience in beholding
   how loving and merciful have been the divine decrees in all that
   regards them. In one instant God impresses these two things upon their
   minds, and as they are in grace they comprehend them as they are, yet
   each according to her capacity. They experience thence a great and
   never-failing satisfaction which constantly increases as they approach
   to God. They see all things, not in themselves nor by themselves, but
   as they are in God, on whom they are more intent than on their
   sufferings. For the least vision they can have of God overbalances all
   woes and all joys that can be conceived. Yet their joy in God does by
   no means abate their pain.

   Which concludes with an application of all that has been said
   concerning the souls in purgatory to what the saint experiences in her
   own soul. 

   "This process of purification to which I see the souls in purgatory
   subjected, I feel within myself, and have experienced it for the last
   two years. Every day I see and feel it more clearly. My soul seems to
   live in this body as in a purgatory which resembles the true
   purgatory, with only the difference that my soul is subjected to only
   so much suffering as the body can endure without dying, but which will
   continually and gradually increase until death.

   "I feel my spirit alienated from all things (even spiritual ones) that
   might afford it nourishment or give it consolation. I have no relish
   for either temporal or spiritual goods through the will, the
   understanding, or the memory, nor can I say that I take greater
   satisfaction in this thing than in that.

   "I have been so besieged interiorly, that all things which refreshed
   my spiritual or my bodily life have been gradually taken from me, and
   as they departed, I learned that they were all sources of consolation
   and support. Yet, as soon as they were discovered by the spirit they
   became tasteless and hateful; they vanish and I care not to prevent
   it. This is because the spirit instinctively endeavors to rid itself
   of every hindrance to its perfection, and so resolutely that it would
   rather go to hell than fail in its purpose. It persists, therefore, in
   casting off all things by which the inner man might nourish himself,
   and so jealously guards him, that no slightest imperfection can creep
   in without being instantly detected and expelled.

   "As for the outward man, for the reason that the spirit has no
   correspondence with it, it is so oppressed that nothing on earth can
   give it comfort according to its human inclinations. No consolation
   remains to it but God, who, with great love and mercy accomplishes
   this work for the satisfaction of his justice. I perceive all this,
   and it gives me a great peace and satisfaction; but this satisfaction
   does by no means diminish my oppression or my pain. Nor could there
   possibly befall me a pain so great, that it could move me to swerve
   from the divine ordination, or leave my prison, or wish to leave it
   until God is satisfied, nor could I experience any woe so great as
   would be an escape from his divine decree, so merciful and so full of
   justice do I find it.

   "I see these things clearly, but words fail me to describe them as I
   wish. What I have described is going on within my spirit, and
   therefore I have said it. The prison which detains me is the world; my
   chains, the body; the soul, illuminated by grace, comprehends how
   great a misery it is to be hindered from her final end, and she
   suffers greatly because she is very tender. She receives from God, by
   his grace, a certain dignity which assimilates her to him, nay, which
   makes her one with him by the participation of his goodness. And as it
   is impossible for God to suffer any pain, it is so also with those
   happy souls who are drawing nearer to him. The more closely they
   approach him the more fully do they share in his perfections.

   "Any delay, then, causes the soul intolerable pain. The pain and the
   delay prevent the full action both of what is hers by nature, and of
   that which has been revealed to her by grace; and, not able as yet to
   possess and still essentially capable of possessing, her pain is great
   in proportion to her desire of God. The more perfectly she knows him,
   the more ardent is her desire, and the more sinless is she. The
   impediments that bar her from him become all the more terrible to her,
   because she is so wholly bent on him, and when not one of these is
   left she knows him as he is.

   "As a man who suffers death rather than offend God does not become
   insensible to the pains of death, but is so illuminated by God that
   his zeal for the divine honor is greater than his love for life, so
   the soul, knowing the will of God, esteems it more than all outward or
   inward torments, however terrible; and this for the reason that God,
   for whom and by whom the work is done, is infinitely more desirable
   than all else that can be known or understood. And inasmuch as God
   keeps the soul absorbed in himself and in his majesty, even though it
   be only in a slight degree, yet she can attach no importance to
   anything beside. She loses in him all that is her own, and can neither
   see nor speak, nor yet be conscious of any injury or pain she suffers,
   but as I have said before it is all understood in one moment as she
   passes from this life. And finally, to conclude all, understand well,
   that in the almighty and merciful God, all that is in man is wholly
   transformed, and that purgatory purifies him."
